

===== PAGE 1 =====

Chapter

1 2 Radioactivity

SYLLABUS

adioactivity and changes in the nucleus; background radiation and safety precautions.

| Scope of syllabus : Brief introduction (qualitative only) of the nucleus, nuclear structure, atomic number O, :
“mass number (A), radioactivity as spontaneous disintegration. a, B and y - their nature and properties; changes _

within the nucleus. One example each of o and B decay with equations showing changes in Z and A. Uses of
“radioactivity - tadio isotopes. Harmful effects. Safety precautions. Background radiation.
| Radiation : X-rays, radioactive fall out from nuclear plants and other sources.

Nuclear energy : Working on safe disposal of waste. Safety measures to be strictly reinforced.

Gi) Nuclear fission and fusion; basic introduction and equations.

(A) ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND RADIOACTIVITY

12.1. STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM AND

NUCLEUS

The discovery of electrons by Sir J.J.
Thomson towards the end of the nineteenth
century and the scattering experiments of alpha
particles by Rutherford and others led to the
following structure of an atom and its nucleus.

Structure of an atom : An atom consists of
electrons, protons and neutrons. The protons and
neutrons reside inside the nucleus of the atom
which is at its centre, while the electrons revolve
around the nucleus in some specific orbits in
which they do not radiate out energy. Such orbits
are called the stationary orbits (or staionary
shells). In each stationary shell, the electron has
a definite energy. The number of shells varies in
atoms of different elements, depending upon the
total number of electrons present in the atom of
that element. The maximum number of electrons
in a shell can be 2n?, where n is the number of
that shell. The various shells around the nucleus
for n = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, ... are named as
K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, ... respectively and these
shells can accommodate at the most 2, 8, 18, 32,
50, 72, 98, ... electrons respectively. The

electrons in different shells have different
energy which increases with the increase in the
number n of that shell.

The size of an atom is determined by the
radius of the shell of its outermost electron and
it is of the order of 10-!° m. The electron has a
negative charge equal to — 1-6 x 107! C (or - e)
and its mass (m,) is nearly 9-1 x 10°! kg which
is approximately 1/1840 times the mass of a
proton.

Structure of nucleus : The nucleus is at the
centre of atom whose size is of the order of
10-5 m to 10-4 m (i.e, 10° to 10% times the
size of the atom). It consists of protons and
neutrons. The proton has a positive charge equal
to + 1-6 x 10°!9 C (or + e) and its mass (m_) is
nearly 1-67 x 10-27 kg. The total number of
protons in the nucleus determines the place of the
atom in the periodic table and is called the
atomic number of the element of that atom. The
atomic number of an element is denoted by the
symbol Z. The neutron is an electrically neutral
particle (i.e., charge = 0) and its mass (m,) is also
nearly 1-67 x 10-77 kg which is equal to that of


===== PAGE 2 =====

a proton*. The protons and neutrons which are
the main constituents of the nucleus, are called
the nucleons. The total number of nucleons in the
nucleus is called the mass number of the element
and it is denoted by the symbol A. The nucleus
is thus positively charged and its total charge is
+ Ze. The mass of nucleus is approximately A
times the mass of a proton.

Note : The mass of an electron is negligible
as compared to that of a proton (or a neutron).

Hence total mass of an atom can be considered
to be same as the mass of its nucleus.

Thus we can define the atomic number and
man numbers as follows.

Symbol, charge and mass of electron, proton and neutron

12.2 ATOMIC MODEL

An atom is electrically neutral, therefore the
number of protons in the nucleus of an atom are
equal to the number of electrons revolving around
the nucleus of the atom.

If Z is the atomic number and A is the mass
number of an atom, then the atom contains

‘number of electrons = Z

number of protons = Z

number of neutrons = A — Z.

(12.1)

* m, = 16726 x 1077 kg;_m, = 1-6749 x 10” kg

The atom is specified by the symbol 4X
where X is the chemical symbol for the element.

The actual size of an atom is very small
(nearly 107! m) which is invisible, but just to
understand the distribution of its consitutents, we
can draw the model of an atom not to the scale.

Examples : (1) The: lightest atom is hydrogen
whose mass number A is 1 and atomic number Z
is also 1. It is represented as |H and it has one
proton in the nucleus and one electron in the
K shell as shown in Fig. 12.1.

Fig. 12.1 Model of hydrogen atom

(2) The helium atom has the mass number
A = 4 and the atomic number Z = 2. It is
represented as 5 He. It has 2 neutrons and
2 protons inside the nucleus and 2 electrons in
the K shell.

4
are
Helium

Fig. 12.2 Model of helium atom

(3) The sodium atom has atomic number
Z = 11 and mass number A = 23. It will have
Z = 11 protons and A —Z = 23 -11 = 12 neutrons
inside the nucleus and Z = 11 electrons distributed

Fig. 12.3 Model of the sodium atom


===== PAGE 3 =====

in the K, L and M shells (2 in the K shell, 8 in
the L shell and 1 in the M shell) as shown in
Fig. 12.3. It is represented as 7} Na.

Note : (1) If an atom undergoes a chemical
change, there is a change in the number of
orbital electrons of the atom, whereas if the
atom undergoes a nuclear change, there is a
change in the number of nucleons inside the
nucleus of the atom.

(2) A nuclear change requires much higher
energy, of the order of few MeV, which is
nearly 10° times as compared to the energy
required for a chemical change, which is of the
order of few eV only.

(3) In a nuclear reaction, the atomic
number (or number of protons) and the mass
number (or total number of protons and
neutrons) remain conserved. In other words,
the total sum of atomic numbers of the
reactants is equal to the sum of atomic
numbers of the products. Similarly, the total
sum of mass numbers of the reactants is equal
to the sum of mass numbers of the products.

12.3 ISOTOPES

Obviously, the isotopes have the same place
in the periodic table as it depends on the atomic
number Z.

The atoms of isotopes have the same number
of protons (Z), but different number of neutrons
(A -Z) in their nucleus. Since they have the same
number of electrons outside the nucleus, so their
chemical properties are also same.

In nature, different isotopes of an element
occur in different proportion. In most of the cases,
the relative abundance of one isotope is very high
as compared to the others.

Examples : (1) Hydrogen has three isotopes,
namely, protium }H (or ordinary hydrogen
which is most abundent), deuterium 7H (or heavy

hydrogen) and tritium +H. Each isotope in its
nucleus has one proton (Z = 1), but protium (1H)
has no neutron, deuterium (7H) has one neutron
and tritium (7H) has two neutrons. There is one
electron outside the nucleus in each isotope.

The table below gives the number of protons
and neutrons in the nucleus of isotopes of
hydrogen.

(2) Carbon has three isotopes 12C, '?C and
4C, out of which 2C is most abundant. Each
isotope in its nucleus has 6 protons (Z = 6).
The isotope 1?C has 6 neutrons, the isotope '?C
has 7 neutrons and the isotope ‘$C has
8 neutrons inside the nucleus. The number of
electrons outside the nucleus in each isotope is 6.

(3) Chlorine has two isotopes *3Cl and 3Cl.
Their relative abundance in nature is in
the ratio 3 : 1. Each isotope in its nucleus, has
17 protons. The isotope *3Cl has 18 neutrons,
while ?7Cl has 20 neutrons inside the nucleus.
The number of electrons outside the nucleus of
each isotope is 17.

Note : (1) Tin (Sn) has the largest number
(= 10) of isotopes.

(2) The isotopes are of two kinds:
(a) stable isotopes which have the number of
neutrons nearly equal to the number of protons
in their nucleus, and (b) unstable or radioactive
isotopes which have number of neutrons much
more than the number of protons in their
nucleus. They undergo radioactive decay and
are of great medical and industrial use.

Example : In *3U and *°8,U, each isotope
has 92 protons inside the nucleus, but 7%U has
143 neutrons while %8U has 146 neutrons
inside the nucleus. In both isotopes, the
number of neutrons are more than the number



===== PAGE 4 =====

of protons, so both are the radio isotopes.
Similarly '4C is a radio isotope out of the
three isotopes '2C, 3C and '4C of carbon.

12.4 ISOBARS

The atoms of isobars have the same number of
nucleons (A) in their nucleus, but different number
of protons (Z) and different number of neutrons
(A — Z). The number of electrons outside the
nucleus is always equal to the number of protons,
so isobars have different number of electrons.

Examples : (1) 7}Na and ?3Mg are isobars.
Na contains 11 protons and 12 neutrons inside
its nucleus, and 11 electrons outside the nucleus,
while br Mg contains 12 protons and 11 neutrons
inside its nucleus and 12 electrons outside the
nucleus. The total number of protons and neutrons

is 23 in each.

(2) Similarly '$C and '$N are isobars. '4C has
6 protons and 8 neutrons inside its nucleus
and 6 electrons outside the nucleus, while '4N
has 7 protons and 7 neutrons inside the nucleus
and 7 electrons outside the nucleus.

Note : If the number of protons and

neutrons get interchanged inside the nucleus,

they are called mirror isobars e.g. 73Na and
23Mg are the mirror isobars.

13.5 ISOTONES

Examples : (1) 7}\Na and *4Mg are the isotones.

1
Each nucleus has 12 neutrons. “Na nucleus has

11 protons, while *$Mg_ nucleus has 12 protons.

(2) 33K and Ar are the isotones (each having
20 neutrons in its nucleus).

12.6 RADIOACTIVITY

Henry Becquerel discovered the phenomenon
of radioactivity in 1896. In a dark room he once
left a uranium salt placed on a photographic plate
wrapped in a black paper. After some days, he
was surprised to found that the photographic plate
had been affected. Later on, the same observation
was made with the other salts of uranium. From
these observations, he concluded that uranium and
its salts by themselves emit some kind of
radiations which can pass through the cover (i.e.,
black paper, glass or wood, etc.) of the
photographic plate and affect it. These radiations
were called the Becquerel rays. On further
investigation, these radiations were found to be of
three types : (1) positively charged, (2) negatively
charged, and (3) uncharged which were named
as o (alpha), B (beta) and y (gamma) radiations
respectively. The substances which emit
these radiations were called the radioactive

substances. Thus

The isotopes of nearly all the elements of
atomic number higher than 82 (i.e., after lead in
the periodic table) are radioactive because in their
nucleus, the number of neutrons is much more
than the number of protons. These are called the
natural radioactive substances.

Any physical change (such as change in
pressure and temperature) or chemical change
(such as excessive heating, freezing, action of
strong electric and magnetic fields, chemical
treatment, oxidation etc.) does not change the
nature of radiation emitted by the substnace and
its rate of decay. This clearly shows that the
phenomenon of radioactivity cannot be due to the
orbital electrons which could easily be affected by
such changes. The radioactivity should therefore
be the property of the nucleus. Thus


===== PAGE 5 =====

Note : From a radioactive substance
containing a very large number of atoms, there

is no way to know (or predict) when or which
nucleus of the atom will decay at any moment,
hence the radioactive decay is a random
phenomenon i.e., there is no law by which the
disintegration of an individual nucleus can be
known (or predicted).

12.7 RADIOACTIVITY AS EMISSION OF
ALPHA (a), BETA (B) AND GAMMA (7)
RADIATIONS

In 1903, Rutherford experimentally studied the
nature of radiations emitted by the radioactive
substances. He found that on subjecting the
radiations given out by a radioactive substance to
a magnetic field in a direction perpendicular to
their path, they separate out into three distinct
constituents as shown in Fig. 12.4 in which
magnetic field is normal to the plane of paper
inwards. Those which turn to the left* must be
positively charged and are called the alpha (or a)
particles. Those which turn to the right must be
negatively charged and are called the beta (or f)
particles. The B particles are deviated more than
the & particles. Those which pass undeviated, must
be the uncharged (or neutral) and are called the
gamma (or Y) radiations. Gamma radiations are

Y MAGNETIC FIELD
INWARDS

x
x
x

xxx XxX xX

RADIOACTIVE

SUBSTANCE LEAD BOX

Fig. 12.4 Deflection of radioactive
radiations in a magnetic field

* The direction of deflection in a magnetic field is given by
Fleming’s left hand rule.

the electromagnetic waves similar to light waves and
are therefore not affected by the magnetic field.

Similarly, if the radiations given out by a
radioactive substance are subjected to an electric
field in a direction perpendicular to their path, they
again separate out into the three constituents as
shown in Fig. 12.5. Those which turn towards the
negative plate, are the positively charged alpha (a)
particles. Those which turn towards the positive
plate, are the negatively charged beta (B) particles.
Those which pass undeviated, are the uncharged
gamma (vy) radiations. The beta particles are
deviated more than the alpha particles.

«— ELECTRIC FIELD

rapioactive &

SUBSTANCE LEAD BOX

Fig. 12.5 Deflection of radioactive
radiations in an electric field
12.8 PROPERTIES OF ALPHA PARTICLES

Some properties of alpha particles are given
below.

(1) An alpha particle consists of two protons and
two neutrons. It is same as a doubly ionised
helium atom*, i.e., a helium nucleus
containing two protons and two neutrons.

It is represented as 4He or He?*. Fig. 12.6 (a)
and (b) respectively represent the model of

(a) HELIUM ATOM (b) ALPHA PARTICLE
Fig. 12.6 Helium atom and alpha particle

* A helium atom which has lost its both the orbitat electrons, is
called a doubly ionised helium atom.


===== PAGE 6 =====

a neutral helium atom and the helium
nucleus (or the alpha particle).
If an alpha particle (He*) gains one electron,
it changes to a singly ionised helium atom
(He*) and if it gains two electrons, it changes
to the helium atom (He). :
(2) The mass of an alpha particle is roughly
four times the mass of a proton (= 4m,)
i.e., 6-68 x 10-77 kg and its charge
is twice the charge of a proton i.e.,
+ 3-2 x 107! C (or + 2e). Thus its specific

charge (i.e., 4 value) is 4-79 x 107 C kg".

(3) The speed of a-particles is of the
order of 107 m s~!, It is different for
a-particles emitted from the different
radioactive substances. Further, all the
Q-particles emitted from the nucleus of the
same radioactive substance do not have the
same energy (or speed), but they have energy
distributed in a small range.

(4) An alpha particle strongly ionises* the gas
through which it passes. The ionising power
of a-particles is roughly 100 times that of
B-particles and roughly 104 times that of
y-radiations.

(5) An a-particle rapidly dissipates its energy as
it moves through a medium and therefore its
penetrating power is quite small. It can
penetrate only through 3 to 8 cm in air. It can
easily be stopped by a thin card sheet or a
thick paper. Its penetrating power is roughly
10-* times that of a B-particle and
10+ times that of y radiation.

Alpha particles are positively charged, so they
are deflected by the electric and magnetic
fields. The deflection of o-particle is less as
compared to that of B-particle, because
-particle is of more mass than the B-particle.

(6)

(7) Q-particles affect a photographic plate.

* Anenergetic particle when suffers collision with the atom of a
gas, it knocks out the electron from the atom which now
becomes a positive ion. This process is called ionisation.

(8)
(9)

Alpha particles cause fluorescence on striking
a fluorescent material.

Alpha particles have large kinetic energy
and momentum with them. They are used
to bombard the nucleus of an atom of one
element to convert it into another element
(i.e., for transmutation).

Alpha particles destroy the living cells and
also cause biological damage.

a-particles get scattered while passing
through the thin mica (or gold) foils.

12.9 PROPERTIES OF BETA PARTICLES

Some properties of beta particles are given
below :

(1)

(10)

qd)

B-particles are the fast moving electrons
emitted from the nucleus* of an atom. It is

represented as 8B or 3 e.

The rest mass of a B-particle is 9-1 x 103! kg
(= m,) and its charge is -1-6 x 107°C
(or—e). Thus the specific charge (or g/m value)
of B-particle is 1-76 x 10!!C kg".

Although both the B-particles and cathode
rays are the fast moving electrons, but they
differ in their origin. B-particles are given out
from the nucleus of the atom, while cathode
rays are given out from its orbital electrons.

(2)

(3)

(4) The speed of beta particles is of the
order of 108 m s~! (but always less than
3 x 108 ms"). Different B-particles emitted
from the same radioactive substance have
different speeds**.

(5) Beta particles ionise the gas through
which they pass. The ionising power of
B-particles is roughly 1/100th times that of
the a-particles, but nearly 100 times that of

the y-radiation.

* Inside the nucleus, the change of a neutron into a proton causes
the emission of a B-particle (jn — |p + 9 e). The beta
particles do not reside inside the nucleus of atom in the form
of electrons.

** 8B-particles emitted from a radioactive substance have energy
distributed in a range from zero to a certain maximum value.


===== PAGE 7 =====

(6) The penetrating power of B-particles is
more than that of o-particles but less than
that of y-particles. They can travel through
nearly 5 m in air and pass through thin card
sheet, and even through thin aluminium foil,
but a 5 mm thick aluminium sheet can stop
the B-particles.

(7) Beta particles are negatively charged, so
they get deflected by the electric and
magnetic fields. The deflection of a
B-particle is in a direction opposite to that
of an a-particle since the charge on
B-particle is negative, while the charge on
@-particle is positive. The deflection of
B-particle is more than that of the o-particle
since a B-particle is much lighter than an
a-particle.

(8) Beta particles affect a photographic plate.

(9) Beta particles cause fluorescence on striking
a fluorescent material.

(10) Beta particles produce X-rays when they are
stopped by the metals (such as tungsten)
of high atomic number and high melting
point.

(11) Beta particles cause more biological
damage than the a-particles as they can
easily pass through the skin of our body.

12.10 PROPERTIES OF GAMMA RADIATIONS

Some properties of gamma radiations are
given below :

(1) Gamma radiations are the electromagnetic
waves like X-rays and light, but they differ
from X-rays and light in wavelength. The
wavelength of gamma radiations is of
the order of 10+ nm (or 10- m), whereas
the wavelength of X-rays is in the range of
10? nm to 10 nm and that of light is in range
of 400 nm to 800 nm.

(2) The speed of y-radiations is same as the
speed of light (i.e., 3 x 108 m s7! in
vacuum or air).

Saas

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

The ionising power of y-radiations is very
low. It is 10+ times that of o-particles and
107 times that of B-particles.

The penetrating power of y-radiations
is high. It is about 10* times that of
-particles and 10? times that of B-particles.
They can travel through 500 m in air and
pass through 30 cm thick sheet of iron. A
thick sheet of lead is required to stop them.

Like X-rays and light, gamma radiations are
not deflected by the electric and magnetic
fields since they are not the charged
particles.

Gamma radiations affect a photographic
plate.

Gamma radiations cause fluorescence when
they strike a fluorescent material.

Gamma radiations are also diffracted by
crystals like X-rays.

Although X-rays and gamma radiations are
similar in properties, but their origin is quite
different. X-rays are emitted when there is
transition of electrons in the inner orbits of
an atom, whereas gamma radiations are
given out from the nucleus.

Gamma radiations can easily pass through
the human body, therefore they cause
immense biological damage.

Gamma radiations are very useful in
the treatment of cancer.

Note : Out of the three radiations a, B and
y, the y-radiations are most energetic and
therefore they have a smaller rate of collisions
with the atoms (or molecules) of the medium
through which they pass. Thus they have least
ionising power, but maximum penetrating

power. On the other hand, o-particles are least
energetic and therefore they suffer more
collisions. Thus they have maximum ionising
power, but least penetrating power. Their
energy is soon dissipated.

as


===== PAGE 8 =====

12.11 DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE PROPERTIES OF a, B AND y RADIATIONS

4. Charge

5. Specific
charge (g/m)

8. Tonising power Maximum (10,000 times of )

11. Biological damage

12.12 CHANGES WITHIN THE NUCLEUS
IN ALPHA, BETA AND GAMMA
EMISSION

We have read that the radioactive substances
are not stable. Their nucleus undergoes
spontaneous decay by the self emission of either
alpha (a), beta (8), or gamma (y) radiation to
form a more stable nucleus. The emission of
a (alpha), B (beta) and y (gamma) radiation is a
nuclear change. In the emission of alpha and beta
radiation, there is a change in the number of
protons and neutrons inside the nucleus, while in
the emission of gamma radiation, there is only a
change in the energy of the nucleus, and no
change in the number of protons and neutrons
inside the nucleus.

(1) Alpha emission : If an unstable nucleus
contains much more neutrons than the number of
protons, it may emit a particle containing two
protons and two neutrons tightly bound together,

1. Nature Stream of positively charged particles Stream of negatively charged | Highly energetic electromagnetic
ie., helium nucleus. particles, i.e., energetic radiations.
electrons.
2. Speed Nearly 107 m s+ About 90% of the speed 3 x 108 m s“! (in vacuum)
of light or 2:7 x 10° ms? .
3. Rest mass Four times the mass of proton. Equal to the mass of electron | No mass (rest mass is zero)
i.e., 6-68 x 107 kg ie., 9-1 x 103! kg
. Positive charge (two times that of a proton) | Negative charge No charge
= + 3-2 x 1079 C (or + 2e) © =~-1-6 x 10-9 C (or - e)
4-79 x 107 C kg!

: Less deflected
and magnetic fields

aaa Cae Tae

Range in cm 3 to 8 cm in air
10. Stopping Thin paper, human skin
substance

1-76 x 10! C kg?

More deflected than alpha
particles, but in a direction
opposite to those of a-particles
Less than alpha particle
(100 times of ¥)

Large

Very large
up to few metre in air up to a few hundred metre in air
About 1 mm thick lead or About 30 cm thick iron or few

about 5 mm thick aluminium | metre thick concrete

known as alpha particle. A stream of o-particles
is called o-rays.

If the nucleus X of a radioactive element of
mass number A and atomic number Z emits an
a-particle, the daughter nucleus Y of a new
element is formed which has mass number equal
to (A—4) and atomic number equal to (Z — 2).
Thus due to emission of an alpha particle, atomic
number Z decreases by 2 units and mass number A
decreases by 4 units. This change can be
expressed in the form of a reaction as follows :

A= -4
=> 7.9

Daughter nucleus

4
He
(a-particle)

A
ze

Parent nucleus

Thus, the resulting nucleus has 2 protons and
2 neutrons (total 4 nucleons) less than the original
(or parent) nucleus.

Example : When a radioactive uranium
nucleus *38U emits an o-particle, a new


===== PAGE 9 =====

nucleus thorium 7 Th is formed and the change is
represented as follows :

su Oh + He
(92 protons and (90 protons and (2 protons and
146 neutrons) 144 neutrons) 2 neutrons)

(2) Beta emission : When an unstable nucleus
contains neutrons more than the protons, a
neutron may change into a proton by emitting an
electron (for charge conservation). The electron
given out from the nucleus at a high speed is
called a beta particle.

The change can be represented by the
following equation :

1
0

(neutron)

1 0
1P + Te

(proton) (B-particle)

n —_

A stream of B-particles is called B-rays.

Note : Later on, to keep the number of
particles either odd or even on both sides,
another partice called anti-neutrino (0), was also
assumed to be emitted along with the B-particle.
This particle is uncharged and its rest mass is

zero. Then the complete transformation equation
becomes

Thus in emitting a B-particle, the number of
nucleons in the nucleus (i.e., sum of protons and
neutrons) remains same, but the number of
neutrons is decreased by one and the number of
protons is increased by one. In other words, by
the emission of a B-particle, the mass number A
does not change, but the atomic number Z is
increased by one. It changes into a new nucleus
of element with properties similar to those of an
element one place higher in the periodic table.
The daughter product is thus an isobar (same
mass number, but different atomic number) of the
parent atom.

If a radioactive nucleus P with mass number A
and atomic number Z emits a beta-particle to
form a daughter nucleus Q with mass number A

and atomic number Z + 1, the change can be
represented as follows :

Example : A radioactive carbon nucleus 14C,
having 14 nucleons (6 protons and 8 neutrons) emits
a B-particle and changes to a new nucleus nitrogen
14N having 14 nucleons (7 protons and 7 neutrons).
The change is represented as follows:

0
e

-1

2 fos UN +
(3) Gamma emission : In many cases an alpha
or beta emission is found to be followed by the
y-emission. It occurs when the daughter or the
parent nucleus is in a state of excitation (i.e., it has
an excess of energy). This extra energy is released
in the form of electromagnetic radiation known as
y-radiation (or y-ray photon). The y-ray takes no
mass and no electric charge from the nucleus i.e.,
no neutrons or protons are lost, hence the nucleus
does not decay into a different nucleus, i.e., there
is no change in the mass number A and atomic
number Z of the nucleus in gamma emission.

The gamma emission is represented as
follows :

Bt 2. some“ bags bi

Here the star indicates the excited state of the
nucleus. Thus in gamma emission, the excited
nucleus comes to its ground state.

Note : (i) The electron emitted in B-decay does
not exist in the nucleus. It.is created as a result
of decay of one neutron into a proton inside the
nucleus and is instantaneously emitted. It is not
possible for electron to stay inside the nucleus.

(2) In a single radioactive decay, « and
B particles are never emitted simultaneously.
There will be either an G-emission or a
B-emission, which may be accompanied by the
‘y-emission.



===== PAGE 10 =====

(3) The daughter product after the emission of
either a-particle or B-particle, may again be

radioactive and it may further decay by emitting
either the a-particle or the B-particle. This
process continues till a stable nucleus is formed.

The table below shows the effect on atomic
number Z and mass number A due to emission of
o, B and y radiations.

Effect on atomic number (Z) and mass number (A)
due to a, B and y emision

12.13 USES OF RADIOACTIVITY — RADIO
ISOTOPES

The isotopes of some elements with atomic
number Z < 82 are also found to be radioactive.
They are called the radio isotopes. The nucleus of
an atom becomes radioactive when number of
neutrons in the nucleus exceeds the number of
protons inside it. For example, cobalt ° Co
(Z = 27, A = 60), carbon '4C (Z = 6, A = 14),
potassium {9K (Z = 19, A = 40), phosphorus *2P
(Z = 15, A = 32), etc. are the radio isotopes. The
radio isotopes are also prepared artificially by the
nuclear transmutation. They find their vital use in
(1) medical, (2) scientific, and (3) industrial fields.

(1) Medical use : (i) Many diseases such as
leukemia, cancer, etc. are cured by radio therapy.
Gamma radiations obtained from cobalt-60 (89Co)
are used to treat cancer by killing the cells in the
malignant tumour of the patient. For radio-therapy,
radiations must be able to penetrate the human
skin.

(ii) The salts of weak radioactive isotopes such
as radio-sodium chloride, radio-iron, radio-iodine
are used for diagnosis. Such radio isotopes are
called the tracers. These tracers are used to detect
the suspected brain tumours and blood clots before
they become dangerous.

The tracers are also used to study the natural
process in the human body. For example, radio-
sodium chloride is injected with common sodium
chloride in the human body and the radioactivity
of the blood at different parts of the body is tested
to study the blood circulation. The process is called
radio cardiology.

(iii) y-rays emitted by the radio isotopes are
used to sterilize bandages, dressings, syringes and
other equipments to make them free of germs. This
method is quicker, more reliable and cheaper than
the process of sterilization by heat.

(2) Scientific use : (i) Alpha particles emitted
from the radio isotopes are used as projectiles for
nuclear reactions. The scattering of alpha particles
from the nucleus helps us in estimating the size
of the nucleus and in understanding the nature of
nuclear forces.

(ii) The radioactive tracers are used in
agriculture science to study the growth of plants
by using a particular chemical manure (e.g. to
know how readily a plant takes in phosphate and
to which part of the plant, the phosphate goes).

(iii) The age of excavated material of
archaeological importance, rocks and hence of
buried plants is estimated by the study of rate of
decay of carbon -14(/4C) in the remains of dead
plants. The process is called carbon dating.

(3) Industrial use : (i) Radio isotopes such as
35U are used as fuel for the atomic energy
reactors.

(ii) Radio isotopes are used by engineers in
factories to avoid the accumulation of charge on
the moving parts of machines due to friction. The
radiations emitted by the isotope ionise the air. The
ions so produced take away with them the charge
accumulated on the moving parts.

(iii) The ionising effect of radiations from the
radio isotopes is used in making certain
luminescent signs.

(iv) Knowing the penetrating power of the
B-radiations emitted from the radio isotopes, they
are used to control the thickness of paper, plastic
and metal sheets during their manufacture.


===== PAGE 11 =====

12.14 SOURCES OF HARMFUL RADIATIONS

The main sources of harmful radiations are :
(1) Radioactive fall out from the nuclear plants
and other similar sources, (2) Nuclear waste, and
(3) other sources e.g. cosmic radiation and
X-rays.

(1) Radioactive fall out from the nuclear
plants and other sources : The nuclear power
plants are now a major source of electricity in the
world. If somehow, there is an accident in the
reactor of a power plant, a large amount of
radioactive material and radiations will escape
into the atmosphere. This will not only affect the
population around the plant, but will also affect
the life at far off places where they will reach due
to air currents. Three such accidents have already
occurred — (i) in U.S.A. on 28 March, 1979,
(ii) in Ukraine in U.S.S.R. on 26 April, 1986, and
(iii) in Japan on 11 March, 2011. These accidents
caused damage to the reactor buildings and
injuries to the persons working in the plants as
well as in their vicinity.

(2) Nuclear waste : The fuel rods used in the
nuclear power reactors are rejected when their
activity decreases below a certain level. They then
become a nuclear waste. These rods are still quite
radioactive and are the source of harmful
radiations therefore they should not be dumped in
open garbage. They can contaminate water and
soil and affect the human and living organisms.

(3) Other sources e.g. cosmic radiation and
X-ray : The cosmic radiations from the sun enter
the earth’s atmosphere from the outer space. They
contain a large number of high energy particles,
out of which although the charged particles are
deviated by the earth’s magnetic field, but a
substantial amount of uncharged radiations such
as y-rays and X-rays etc. reach the earth’s
atmosphere. These radiations are harmful for the
human beings.

Apart from this, the high energy particle
accelerators also produce the harmful
X-rays.

12.15 HARMFUL EFFECTS OF RADIATION

The radiations produced in nuclear reaction
includes alpha radiations, beta radiations,
neutrons, gamma rays and X-rays. They interact
with the living tissues within 10-!+s and cause
biological damage.

The biological effects of nuclear radiations are
of three types : (1) short term recoverable effects,
like diarrhea, sore throat, loss of hair, nausea,
etc. (2) long term irrecoverable effects like
leukemia and cancer, and (3) genetic effects. The
first and second effects are limited to the
individuals who are actually exposed to the
radiations, while the third effect appears in the
later generations of the person exposed to the
radiation. The genes in his cell get modified (or
mutated).

The exposure to radiations can be acute if
there is an accidental burst of radiations from
an unshielded source. Similarly, it is chronic in
case of persons working in atomic energy
establishments when they get exposed to such
radiations.

The exposure of pregnant woman to X-rays
for a long time may affect the child in the womb.
It increses the risk of cancer by 40%, of tumor
and nervous system by 50% and of lukemia
by 70%. The exposure of upper part of the body
to X-rays may damage thyroid glands and can
cause cancer.

The exposure to y-rays destroys the cells of
the body and affects the blood cells, gestro
intestinal track, reproductive and hair cells. It can
harm the DNA and RNA of the living cells also.

The uncharged neutrons also cause biological
damage.

12.16 SAFETY PRECEDUTURE WHILE
USING NUCLEAR ENERGY

We have read that now a days electricity is

also generated by the use of nuclear energy

obtained from the nuclear power plants. In a

nuclear power plant, a radioactive source such as


===== PAGE 12 =====

uranium-235 or plutonium-239 is used and
the controlled chain fission reaction is
carried out. Following require special care :
(1) establishment of nuclear power plants,
(2) handling of radioactive materials, and
(3) safe disposal of nuclear waste.

(1) Safety measures while establishing a
nuclear power plant : While establishing a nuclear
power plant to generate electricity following
precautions must be taken.

(i) Ensure that the people working in it are not
exposed to nuclear radiations and in case of
any accident there is a minimum spread of
radiations.

The nuclear reactor of the power plant must
be shielded with lead and steel walls so as
to stop radiations from escaping out to the
environment during its normal operation.

(ii)

The nuclear reactor must be housed in an
airtight building of strong concrete structure
which can withstand the earthquakes, fires
and explosions.

(iii)

(iv) There must be a back-up of cooling system
for the reactor core, so that in case of failure
of one system, the other cooling system could
take its place and the core is saved from over

heating and melting.

(2) Safety measures while handling radio-
active materials : People working with
radioactive materials are required to follow strictly
the safety measures given below :

(i) They should put on special lead lined aprons
and lead gloves.

They should handle the radioactive materials
with long lead tongs.

(ii)
(iii) The safety limit for each type of radiation is
known, therefore care must be taken to ensure
that no one is exposed beyond the safety limit
in any case. For this, special film badges are
used which are tested from time to time to
know the amount of radiations to which a
particular person has been exposed.

(iv) The radioactive substance must be kept in a
thick lead container with a very narrow
opening, so as to stop radiations coming out
from other directions. A container should be
such that it absorbs the radiations which
strike on its walls from inside. Alpha particles
can easily be stopped by a thin metal sheet,
but for B-particles we need a thick metal
sheet, whereas gamma radiations need the
very thick lead sheets.

(3) Safety measures in safe disposal of
nuclear waste : The radioactive material after its
use is known as nuclear waste. The nuclear waste
obtained from laboratories, hospitals, scientific
establishments or power plants must be first kept
in thick casks and then they must be buried in
the specially constructed deep underground stores.
These stores must be made quite far from the
populated areas. The casks can also be buried in
useless mines and these mines must be sealed
after storing the casks.

12.17 BACKGROUND RADIATIONS

The background radiations are the radioactive
radiations (such as a, B and y) to which we all
are exposed, even in the absence of an actual
radioactive source.

Sources : There are two sources of
background radiations : (1) the internal source —
the radioactive substances such as potassium
(K-40), carbon (C-14), and radium present inside
our body*, and (2) external source — cosmic
rays, naturally occurring radioactive elements such
as radon = 222 and solar radiations.

It is not possible for us to keep ourselves
away from the background radiations. But the
total background radiations from both the internal
and external sources not exceed the maximum
permissible dose** for human safety, so we need
not worry.

* K-40 and C-14 are present in our entire body and they affect
all parts equally, while radium is largely found in bones and
so it affects only the bones and the reproductive organs.

** The effect of different radiations on human tissue is measured

in unit sieverts (Sv) dose. In one exposure of X-rays for chest,
the patient receives 0-2 milli sieverts dose of radiations.

=


===== PAGE 13 =====

saincpmomeresarseanicapmgea PXAMPES lo. urge eRe

1. State two differences between a chemical change
and a nuclear change.

(i) A chemical change is due to change in orbital
electrons, while a nuclear change is due to
change in nucleons inside the nucleus.

(ii) A nuclear change requires much higher energy
than a chemical change.

2. How is the radioactivity of an element affected
when it undergoes a chemical change to form a
chemical compound ? Give reason for your
answer.

The radioactivity of the element remains unaffected.

Reason : Radioactivity is a nuclear phenomenon.

3. Compare the ionising power of a, B and
y radiations.
a-particles have the maximum ionising power, it is
about 10? times that of B-particles and 10‘ times that
of y-radiation.

4. State the penetrating range in air for the o, B and
Y radiations.

The penetrating range of o-particles is 3 cm to

8 cm of air, of B-particles is about 5 m of air and of

y-radiations is about 500 m of air. Thus the

penetrating range of o-particles is the least and of
y-radiations is the most.

5. State the nature of infrared and y-rays. How
do they differ in their (i) wavelength, and
(ii) penetrating power ?

Both infrared and y-rays are the electromagnetic

radiations.

Differences :

(1) y-rays have much shorter wavelength
(=10-3 m) as compared to the infrared rays
whose wavelength is nearly 10° m or more.

(2) y-rays are much more penetrating as compared
to the infrared radiations.

6. State two similarities and two dissimilarities
between the y-rays and X-rays.
Similarities :

(1) Both the y-rays and X-rays are the
electromagnetic waves.

(2) Both the y-rays and X-rays travel with a speed
3 x 108 ms“ in air (or vaccum).

Dissimilarities :
(1) The wavelength of y-rays is shorter than that of
X-rays. The wavelength of y-rays is 10> A,
while that of X-rays is 1 A.

(2) y-rays are more penetrating than X-rays.
7. Which of the radiations a, B and y is similar to
a beam of electrons ?
B-radiation is similar to a beam of electrons.

8. (a) State three properties which are common to
both the beta rays and cathode rays.

(b) How do beta rays differ from cathode rays ?
(a) Common properties :
(1) Both are negatively charged with charge and
mass equal to that of an electron.

(2) Both are deflected by the electric and
magnetic fields.

(3) Both cause fluorescence on striking a
fluorescent material.

(b) Difference :

Beta rays differ from cathode rays in their
origin. Beta rays are given out from the nucleus
of the atom, while cathode rays are given out
from the orbital electrons.

9. One isotope of uranium has a mass number 235
and atomic number 92.
(i) What is the number of electrons in the
neutral atom of this isotope ?
(ii) What is the number of protons and number
of neutrons in its nucleus ?

(iii) Do all isotopes have the same number of
neutrons ?

(iv) What is the number of protons and
neutrons in 738U ?
(i) Given : A = 235, Z= 92
Atomic number Z = number of protons
= number of electrons = 92.
. The neutral atom of _ U will have 92
electrons.
(ii) The number of protons =Z = 92
The number of neutrons = A — Z
= 235 — 92 = 143.


===== PAGE 14 =====

The nucleus of i U contains 92 protons and
143 neutrons.

(iii) No. Isotopes of an element have same atomic
number, but different mass number as they
have the same number of protons, but different
number of neutrons.

(iv) In a U, number of protons = Z = 92 and
number of neutrons = A — Z = 238 — 92 = 146.

10. A certain nucleus P has a mass number 15 and

11.

atomic number 7.

(a) Find the number of neutrons.

(b) Write the symbol for the nucleus P.

(c) The nucleus P loses (i) one proton, (ii) one
B-particle, (iii) one a-particle. Write the
symbol of the new nucleus in each case and
express each change by a reaction.

Given : For the nucleus P, A = 15, Z=7

(a) Mass number A

= number of protons + number of neutrons
and atomic number Z = number of protons.
-. Number of neutrons
= mass number A — atomic number Z
=15-7=8

(b) The nucleus P can be written as 13P.

(c) (i) After the loss of 1 proton, the mass number

and atomic number of the nucleus 14P will

decrease by 1. The new nucleus will be 14Q
(say). The change can be written as :
SP 4Q 4! p
(ii) After the loss of one B-particle, the mass
number will remain the same, but the
atomic number will increase by 1. The
nucleus !3P changes to !3R (say) as follows:

15 15 0
7P— gk Me Te

After the loss of one a-particle, the mass
number decreases by 4 and the atomic
number decreases by 2. The nucleus !3P
changes to 'JS (say) as follows :

(iii)

15 ll 4
7p 5S + > He
Uranium nucleus - U undergoes several
sian gOS and ultimately decays to lead
nucleus 2 82 06 Ph. How many alpha and beta
particles are emitted ?

12.

AX
13,

When ae U decays to 2% Pb, the mass number
decreases from 238 to 206 i.e., it decreases by 32.
Since the emission of beta particle does not change
the mass number and with the emission of one
alpha particle, mass number decreases by 4, so total

number of alpha particles emitted will be 2 =8;

In the decay of 28 U to 2 Pb, the atomic number
has decreased by 10. But due to emission of 8 alpha
particles, the atomic number would have decreased
by 2 x 8 = 16. Thus there is an increase in atomic
number by 16 — 10 = 6, hence 6 beta particles will
be emitted (because in emission of one beta particle,
atomic number increases by 1).

Thus = U decays to 206 Pb with the emission of
8 a-particles and 6 B-particles.

Complete the following nuclear changes :

Ps a, a Aa ee

Due to emission of a B-particle, the atomic number
increase by 1, but the mass number is unchanged.
Due to emission of an o-particle, the atomic number
decrease by 2 and the mass number decreases by 4.
Due to emission of a y-particle, there is no change
in the atomic number and mass number.

The complete nuclear changes are :

B

Ay Y As B
et ths 7, =

wax.
— 7%
Complete the following nuclear changes :

». SEND Fh at, &, F yx. —o, 06x,

The daughter nucleus §2X, is formed after a decay
of X,, so atomic number of X, will be 2 units more
and its mass number will be 4 units more i.e., X; is
210%
343°

The nucleus 7!°X, is formed after the B decay of X,,
so atomic number of X, will be 1 unit less while its
mass number will be same i.e., X, is 74)X,.

The nucleus 7!,X, is formed after the ‘y decay of X,,
so X, will have no change in atomic number and
mass number, but X, will be in excited state i.e., X,
is 710X°.

The nucleus ?\2.X‘ is the daughter product of
a decay of X, so atomic number of X will be 2 units
more and its mass number will be 4 units more i.e.,
X will be 74x.


===== PAGE 15 =====

214 G . 20y* _Y
asx > “gX, —

14.

15.

Thus the complete nuclear change is :
B

7x, Ps 8x, 2, BK,

A radioactive sample is kept at the centre of an

evacuated spherical vessel.

(a) Out of the a, B and y radiations, name the
radiations which are (i) safe and (ii) unsafe.

(b) Suggest two ways for more safety.

(c) Does evacuation of vessel help in safety ?

(a) (i) & radiations have a less penetrating power
and therefore they are stopped by the walls of
vessel. Thus the vessel is safe for the a
radiations. (ii) The B and y radiations are not

stopped by the walls of vessel, so the vessel is
unsafe for the B and y radiations.

(b) Suggestions :
(1) The sphere must have lead walls.
(2) The sphere must be of large radius.

(c) No. The vessel should not be evacuated. The air
in it will help in absorbing the radiations.

(a) A mass of lead is embedded in a block of

wood. Radiations from a radioactive source
incident on the side of block produce a

16.

shadow on a fluorescent screen placed beyond
the block. The shadow of wood is faint, but
the shadow of lead is dark. Give reason for
the difference.

(b) If the block of wood is replaced by a block of
aluminium, will there be any change in the
shadow?

(a) Reason : The shadow of wood is faint because
only the & radiations are stopped by the wood
(since @ radiations are least penetrating).
The shadow of lead is dark because B and
radiations are also stopped by lead.

(b) If wood is replaced by aluminium (or any other
light metal), the shadow of aluminium block will
remain faint because aluminium will not stop the
y radiations.

State one use and one harmful effect of the

radioactivity.

Use : The radiations given out in the decay process

are used to cure certain diseases, like cancer.

Harmful effect : The radiations can damage the
living tissues.

Name the three constituents of an atom and state
mass and charge of each. How are they distributed
in an atom ?

Define the terms :

(a) atomic number, and (b) mass number.

What is nucleus of an atom ? Compare its size with
that of the atom. Name its constitutents. How is the
number of these constituents determined by the
atomic number and mass number of the atom ?
State the atomic number and mass number of 7}Na
and draw its atomic model.

What are isotopes ? Give one example.

What are isobars ? Give one example.

Name the atoms of a substance having same atomic
number, but different mass numbers. Give one
example of such a substance. How do the structures
of such atoms differ ?

What is meant by radioactivity ? Name two
radioactive substances.

10.

11.

A radioactive substance is oxidised. What changes
would you expect to take place in the nature of
radioactivity ? Explain your answer.
Ans. no change because radioactivity is a
nuclear phenomenon
A radioactive source emits three type of radiations.
(a) Name the three radiations.
(b) Name the radiations which are deflected by the
electric field.
(c) Name the radiation which is most penetrating.
(d) Name the radiation which travels with the
speed of light.
(e) Name the radiation which has the highest
ionising power.
(f) Name the radiation consisting of the same kind
of particles as the cathode rays.
A radioactive source emits three type of radiations.
(a) Name the radiation of zero mass.
(b) Name the radiation which has the lowest

ionising power.


===== PAGE 16 =====

= |

12.

13.

14.

(c) Name the radiation which has the lowest
penetrating power.

(d) Give the charge and mass of particles
composing the radiation in part (c).

(e) When the particle referred to in part (c)
becomes neutral, it is found to be the atom of
a rare gas. Name this rare gas and draw a
model of its neutral atom.

(f) From which part of the atom do these
The diagram in Fig. 12.7 shows a
radioactive source S placed in a
thick lead walled container. The
radiations given out are allowed
to pass through a magnetic field.
The magnetic field (shown as x)
acts perpendicular to the plane of
paper inwards. Arrows show the
paths of the radiations A, B and
Cc

A

(a) Name the radiations
labelled A, B and C.

(b) Explain clearly how you used the diagram to
arrive at the answer in part (a).

Fig. 12.7

Fig. 12.8 shows a mixed source RR x x x x x
of alpha and beta particles DB 5a ae ae
thick lead walled container. The See ee
particles pass through a magnetic

field in a direction perpendicular to SESE
the plane of paper inwards as * * | * *
shown by x. (a) Show in the

diagram how the particles get

affected. (b) Name the law used in R
part (a).

[Hint : alpha particles will deflect

to the left while beta particles to the Fig. 12.8

right]

Fig. 12.9 shows a radioactive
source § in a thick lead walled
container having a narrow
opening. The radiations pass
through an electric field between

the plates A and B. s
(a) Complete the diagram to show
the paths of a, B and y Fig. 12.9

radiations.

(b) Why is the source S kept in a thick lead walled
container with a narrow opening ?

15:

16.

[Hint : o radiations will deflect towards the negative
plate, B radiations towards the positive plate and
y radiations remain undeflected]

Explain why alpha and beta particles are deflected in
an electric or a magnetic field, but gamma rays are
not deflected in such a field.

[Hint : alpha and beta particles are charged, but
gamma rays are uncharged]

Is it possible to deflect y radiations in a way similar
to « and B-particles, using the electric or magnetic
field ? Give reason.

Ans. No. The reason is that y radiations are uncharged

17.

18.

19.

20.

22.

State following four properties each of o, B and y
radiations : (a) nature, (b) charge, (c) mass, and
(d) effect of electric field.
Arrange the a, B and y radiations in ascending order
of their (i) ionising power, and (ii) penetrating
power. Ans. (i) ¥< B< ai) a<B<y
State the speed of each of a, B and y radiations.
Ans. 107 ms, 2 x 108ms"!, 3 x 108 ms
(a) What is the composition of o, B and y radiations?
(b) Which one a, B or y radiation has the least
penetrating power ?
Ans, (a) @ radiation is composed of 2p and 2n,
B radiation is composed of electron, while
y radiation is photon or electromagnetic wave.
(b) & radiation has the least penetrating power.

. How are y radiations produced ? Mention two

common properties of the gamma radiations and

visible light.

An a-particle captures (i) one electron, (ii) two

electrons. In each case, what does it change to ?
Ans. (i) singly ionised helium He*

(ii) neutral helium atom
‘Radioactivity is a nuclear phenomenon’. Comment
on this statement.

24. What kind of change takes place in a nucleus

25.

when a B-particle is emitted ? Express it by an
equation. State whether (a) atomic number, and
(b) mass number are conserved in a radioactive
B-decay ?
A certain radioactive nucleus emits a particle that
leaves its mass unchanged, but increases its atomic
number by one. Identify the particle and write its
symbol.
: 0, 0
Ans. beta particle, fe or _)B


===== PAGE 17 =====

26. What happens to the (i) atomic number, (ii) mass
number of an element when (a) an -particle, (b) a
B-particle, and (c) y radiation, is emitted ?

Ans. (i) (a) decreases by 2, (b) increases by 1,
(c) no change
(ii) (a) decreases by 4 (b) no change (c) no change

27. What happens to the position of an element in the
periodic table when it emits (a) an o-particle,
(b) a B-particle and (c) y radiation ? Give reason for
your answer.

Ans. (a) changes to two places earlier
(b) changes to one place after, (c) no change

Reason : (a) atomic number decreses by 2.

(b) atomic number increases by 1.

(c) no change in atomic number.

28. What changes occur in the nucleus of a radioactive

element when it emits (a) an alpha particle, (b) a

beta particle, (c) gamma radiation ? Give one

example, in each case (a) and (b) in support of your
answer.

29. (a) An atomic nucleus A is composed of 84 protons
and 128 neutrons. The nucleus A emits an
@-particle and is transformed into a nucleus B.
What is the composition of B ?

(b) The nucleus B emits a B-particle and is
transformed into a nucleus C. What is the
composition of C ?

(c) What is the mass number of the nucleus A ?

(d) Does the composition of nucleus C change if it
emits the y radiation ?
Ans. (a) 82 protons and 126 neutrons
(b) 83 protons and 125 neutrons (c) 212 (d) no
A certain nucleus A (mass number 238 and atomic
number 92) is radioactive and becomes a nucleus B
(mass number 234 and atomic number 90) by the
emission of a particle.
(a) Name the particle emitted.
(b) Explain how you arrived at your answer.
(c) State the change in the form of a reaction.
Ans. (a) & (b) atomic number has decreased by 2 and
mass number has decreased by 4

(c) 8A + 7OB + 3He
31. State whether the following nuclear disintegrations

are allowed or not (star indicates an excited state).
Given reason if it is not allowed.

(a) AX* > 4x+y

(b) 7X > 73X+ 4He
Ans. (a) allowed (b) not allowed
Reason : mass number is not conserved in (b)

32. A nucleus ?{Na is B-radioactive.
(a) What are the numbers 24 and 11 called ?
(b) Write the equation representing B-decay.
(c) What general name is given to the product
nucleus with respect to 74Na ?
Ans. (a) 24 — mass number, 11 — atomic number
(b) *4Na > *bMg + Se (c) isobar
33. A nucleus of stable phosphorus has 15 protons and
16 neutrons.
(a) What is its atomic number and mass number ?
(b) The nucleus of radio phosphorus has one
neutron more than the stable nucleus. What
will be its atomic number and mass number ?
(c) What will be the atomic number and mass
number of new nucleus formed by the decay of
a B- particle by the radio phosporus in part (b) ?
Ans. (a) atomic number = 15, mass number = 31
(b) atomic number = 15, mass number = 32
(c) atomic number = 16, mass number = 32

34. An element P disintegrates by & emission and the

new element suffers two further disintegrations, both
by B emission, to form an element Q. Explain the
fact that P and Q are isotopes.
Ans. The atomic number of P decreases by 2 due to
the emission of one a-partcle and then increases
by 1 due to the emission of each B-particle, so the
atomic number of Q formed after the emission of
one « and two B particles is same as that of P.
Hence P and Q are isotopes. The mass number of Q
is less by 4 than that of P.

35. Anucleus 4X emits 2 ©. particles and 1 particle to
form a nucleus 722R. Find the atomic number and
mass number of X.

Ans. atomic number Z = 88, mass number A = 230
36. Complete the following sentences :

(a) The mass number and atomic number of an
element are not changed when it emits
The atomic number of a radioactive element is
not changed when it emits ...........scsecseseseeenees
During the emission of a beta particle, the
... number remains same.

Ans. (a) y radiations (b) y radiations (c) mass



===== PAGE 18 =====

x Complete the following nuclear changes :

() £P—>Q+ %

(>) SU —> Th+

8
© Ze Soa5ir4s
A 2 Y 3B
() 7X 4X5 X, 5X,

5
(e) X > X, > X, +5 "Bx,

Ams (2) 2.Q (b) He (c) 4Q 74R, 345

(8) 222Xp 2-2Xx “2X ©) "HX
What are radio isotopes ? Give one example of a
tatho isotope. State one use of radio isotopes.
Why are the alpha particles not used in radio
therapy ?
[Himt : alpha particles cannot penetrate the human
skin]
Why do we usually use isotopes emitting gamma
radiations as radioactive tracers in medical science ?
[Hint : gamma radiations are most penetrating]
When does the nucleus of an atom become
radioactive ?
Which of the following is the radio isotope in each
pair (a), (b) and (c) ?
@i 4G UC. by RP BP’ (Co) BKK
Give reason for your answer.
Ans. (a) '{C, (b) *7P, (©) “kK
Reason : The number of neutrons exceeds the
number of protons.
. State the medical use of radioactivity.
. Arrange the a, B and y radiation in ascending order
of their biological damage. Give reason.
Ans.a<B<y
Reason : y radiation has the penetrating
power more than the B radiation and the penetrating
power of 8 radiation is more than that of the
© radiation.

180 180
7B 72x

».

41.

£6

oe he CAL

12.18 NUCLEAR ENERGY

In a nuclear change due to a radioactive
phenomena (such as decay, fission or fusion), the
total sum of masses of product nuclei is always

Name two main sources of nuclear radiations. How
are the nuclear radiations harmful ?

45.

46. State two safety measures to be taken while

establishing a nuclear power plant.

47. What is meant by nuclear waste ? State one way for

the safe disposal of nuclear waste.

48. State three safety precautions that you would take

while handling the radioactive substances.
Why should a radioactive substance not be touched
by hand ?

What do you mean by background radiations ?
Name its two sources. Is it possible for us to keep
ourselves away from it ?

49.

50.

MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE
1. A radioactive substance emits radiations :
(a) a, B and y simultaneously
(b) in the order a, B and y one by one
(c) X-rays and y-rays

(d) @ or B. Ans. (d) a or B
2. In B-emission from a radioactive substance, an
electron is ejected. This electron comes from :
(a) the outermost orbit of atom
(b) the inner orbits of atom
(c) the surface of substance
(d) the nucleus of atom.
Ans. (d) the nucleus of atom
3. The least penetrating radiation is :
(a) a-particles (b) B-particles
(c) X-rays (d) y radiations.
Ans. (a) a-particles
4, The radiation suffering the maximum deflection in a

magnetic field is :
(a) a-particles
(c) X-rays

(b) B-particles
(d) y radiations.
Ans. (b) B-particles

less than the total sum of the masses of reactant
nuclei. Thus there is a loss in mass. In 1905, on
the basis of theory of relativity Einstein suggested
that mass and energy are interchangeable. Due



===== PAGE 19 =====

to loss in mass Am, the energy released is £
where
E = (Am)c?
Here Am is the loss in mass in kg, c is the
speed of light (3 x 108 m s“) and E is the energy
in joule (J).
When 1 kg mass is lost, the amount of energy
released is
E = (Am) 2 = 1x (3 x 108)? = 9 x10! J
Since 1 kWh = 3-6 x 10° J
_ 9x10"
~ 3.6x10°
Thus, 1 kg mass is equivalent to 9 x 10!6 J
or 2:5 x 10!° kWh of energy. The energy so
obtained is called the. nuclear energy.

‘kWh = 2:5 x 10! kWh.

In class IX, we have read that the mass of
atomic particles is expressed in atomic mass
unit (a.m.u) or unified unit (u) where

1
1 ‘amau,= DR x mass of one atom of
carbon-12.
1 12x107 kg
or l amu. =

72 *~ 602x10™ per kg mol
1-66 x 10-7 kg

Due to loss in mass Am = 1 a.m.u., the energy
released is

I

E = (1-66 x 10-7) x (3 x 108) J

= 1-49 x 10° J
But 1 MeV = 1-6 x 10° J
4 -10
E= a MeV = 931 MeV

Thus, 1 a.m.u. of mass is equivalent to
931 MeV of energy.
Note : The mass of an electron, proton and
neutron in terms of kg, a.m.u. and MeV are as
follow :
Mass of electron =

(12.3)

9-1091 x 107! kg
0-00055 a.m.u.
= 0-511 MeV

Mass of proton = 1-6725 x 10-7” kg

1:00727 a.m.u.

938-3 MeV

1-6748 x 10°27 kg

= 1-00865 a.m.u.
939 MeV

Mass of neutron

12.19 NUCLEAR FISSION

The reason for the release of energy is that the
sum of masses of the product nuclei is less than
the sum of mass of the parent nucleus and
neutron, i.e., there is a loss of mass in this
reaction. This loss in mass is converted into
energy by the Einsten’s mass-energy relation
E = (Am)c?.

In 1939, Strassman and Otto-Hann found that
when a slow neutron strikes the 735U nucleus, it
gets absorbed in it and a most unstable isotope
236U. is formed which splits into two nuclei
(i) barium (!44Ba) and (ii) krypton (&Kr),
with the release of three neutrons and a
tremendous amount of energy, as shown in
Fig. 12.10. The fission reaction is expressed as
follows :

Fig. 12.10 Fission of *}U nucleus

Later on, it was found that 734U isotope
decays not only into “4Ba and §?Kr fragments,


===== PAGE 20 =====

but it can decay in different pairs of nuclei such
as (1#Ba, Kr); ('48La, 83Br), etc. for which
nuclear reactions are :

SU + fp > CHU) > 'EBa + $2kr +3 dn + energy

*3U + kn > CU) > 'SLa + 8Br + 3 dn + energy

Note : (1) In each fission reaction, the
atomic number (Z) and mass number (A)
remain conserved.

(2) The two fragments obtained on fission
of one U-235 nucleus are unstable and they

emit icles and y rays to become stable.

Nuclear energy obtained in one fission
reaction of 35U nucleus : Due to fission of one
uranium nucleus, nearly 190 MeV energy is
released. The cause of emission of this energy is
the loss in mass i.e., the sum of masses of
product nuclei is less than the sum of mass of the
parent nucleus and neutron. Consider the fission
reaction of 733U nucleus as :

23U + In > '¥Ba + &Kr + 3 dn + energy
If we take the mass of neutron = 1-01 a.m.u.,
mass of uranium-235 nucleus = 234-99 a.m.u.,

mass of barium-144 nucleus = 143-87 a.m.u.,
mass of krypton-89 nucleus = 88-90 a.m.u., then

Loss in mass in fission reaction of one
nucleus

Am = (mass of *33U nucleus + mass of
1 neutron) — (mass of '44Ba nucleus
+ mass of §%Kr nucleus + mass of
3 neutrons)
= [(234-99 + 1-01) — (143-87 + 88-90
+3 x 1-01)] a.m.u.
= (236-00 — 235-80) a.m.u = 0-20 a.mu.
But from the mass-energy equivalence
E = (Am)c*
1 am.u. = 931 MeV
Energy released E = 0:20 x 931 MeV
= 190 MeV

Thus in the fission of one 73°,U nucleus,
92

nearly 190 MeV energy is released. The major
part of this energy is obtained in form of the
kinetic energy of the fragments obtained from the
fission and the remaining part is obtained in the
form of.the kinetic energy of the neutrons
emitted, y-rays, heat and light.

Due to fission of 1 g of 33U (= 2-56 x 107!
nucleus), nearly 4-8 x 1073 MeV energy is
released from which 2-1 x 104 kWh electrical
energy can be obtained. Actually this much energy
is generated due to the explosion of nearly
20 tonne of trinitrotoluene (TNT).

Note : The ore of uranium found in nature
contains two isotopes (99-3% 738U and 0:7%
235U). Although both the isotopes are
fissionable, but experimentally it is found that
the isotope 733U is more easily fissionable than
the isotope 738U. The reason is that the fission
of 38U nucleus is possible only by the fast

neutrons, while the fission of 735U nucleus can

be even by the slow neutrons.

Controlled and uncontrolled chain reactions

We have read that when slow neutrons are
bombarded on uranium-235 (733,U), each uranium
nucleus splits into two nearly equal fragments
(44Ba and &Kr), with a release of three new
neutrons and tremendous amount of energy
(nearly 190 MeV). These new neutrons can
fission the other uranium nuclei under the suitable
conditions. Thus a chain of fission of nuclei is
formed which once started, continues till the
entire uranium is consumed. Hence the energy
obtained from the nuclear fission continuously
increases. Due to such a chain reaction, a strong
explosion of entire uranium occurs in a very short
interval of time and tremendously high energy is
released which can be very harmful. This is
the uncontrolled chain reaction. A nuclear bomb
is based on it.


===== PAGE 21 =====

If the chain reaction is controlled by absorbing
some of the neutrons emitted in the fission
process by means of moderators (such as graphite,
heavy water, etc.), the energy obtained in fission
can be utilised for the constructive purposes. This
is the Aaarcak of a nuclear reactor.

: The tremendous amount of
energy released in the process of fission can be
used in two ways : (1) for the destructive use,
and (2) for the constructive use.

ION BETWE

=EN THE RADIOACTIVE DECAY ANI

(1) For the destructive use : The fission
process is used in a nuclear bomb
(sometimes also called an atom bomb, but
the word atom bomb is a misnomer) where
the enérgy released is fast and uncontrolled.

For the constructive use : The fission
process is used in a nuclear reactor where
the rate of release of energy is slow and
controlled. This energy is used to generate
the electric power’.

(2)

NUCLEAR FISSION

ahhoust both the radioactive decay and nuclear fission are the nuclear phenomena, but ‘hy differ

as follows.

Radioactive decay _

Nuclear fission

dQ) It

It is a self process.
(2) The nucleus emits either the a or B
particles with the emission of energy in
form of rays which is not very large.

| (3) The rate of radioactive decay can not be
controlled.

Te

Nuclear fusion is the pi Process in which two 0 light
| nuclei combine to form a heavy nucleus. In
| this process also, huge amount of energy is

released.

The reason for the release of energy is that
the mass of the product nucleus is less than the
sum of masses of the two combining nuclei. This
loss in mass is released in form of energy
according to the mass-energy equivalence relation

E = (Am)c?.

Example : When two deuterium nuclei (2H)
fuse, 3-3 MeV energy is released and the nucleus
of helium isotope (3He) is formed. This helium
isotope again gets fused with one deuterium

nucleus to form a helium nucleus (4He) and

(1) It does not-occur by itself. For it, neutrons
are bombarded on a heavy nucleus.
(2) On bombardment of a heavy nucleus with
neutrons, a tremendous amount of energy |
is released and the nucleus splits in two
nearly equal fragments.
(3) The rate of nuclear fission can be |
controlled.

18-3 MeV energy is released in this process. The
nuclear reactions are :

7H 6+ «67H

(deuterium) (deuterium)

3 0.
>He + yt
(neutron)

+ 3:3 MeV
(helium isotope)

3He + 7H 3 + 18-3 MeV

(helium isotope) (deuterium)

Thus in all, three deuterium nuclei fuse
to form a helium nucleus with a release of
21-6 MeV energy. A part of this energy is
obtained in form of the kinetic energy of neutron
(4m) and proton (}H).

4 1
sHe + jH

(helium) (proton)

reaction

2H + 0-42 MeV

(deuterium)

(i) 1H +

(proton)

‘Hq >
(proton)


===== PAGE 22 =====

2 7H + 7H > 7H + 1H + 40 MeV
deuterium) (deuterium) (titium) (proton)

3) FH + 7H > {He + In + 17-6 MeV
(deuterium) (tritium) (helium) (neutron) :

(4) 7H + 7H > 3He + In + 3-3 MeV
(deuterium) (deuterium) (helium (neutron)

isotope)

(5) 3He + 7H ~ jHe + 1H + 18-3 MeV
(belium (deuterium) (helium) (proton)
tsotope)

Nuclear fusion is not possible at ordinary
temperature and ordinary pressure. The reason is
that when two nuclei approach each other, due to
their positive charge, the electrostatic force of
repulsion between them becomes too strong that
they do not fuse. Hence to make the fusion
possible, a high temperature (~ 107 K) and high
pressure is required. At such a high temperature,
both nuclei due to thermal agitations acquire
sufficient kinetic energy so as to overcome the
force of repulsion between them when they
approach each other, and so they get fused. This
is why the fusion reaction is also called the
thermo-nuclear reaction.

(1) The source of energy in sun and
stars is the nuclear fusion of light nuclei (such
as hydrogen) present in them in their inner part
at a very high temperature (~ 107 K) and high
pressure, as a result of which helium nucleus
is formed with a release of tremendous amount
of energy. The reaction is :

VCCN

oa : Nuclear fission
(1) In fission when neutrons are bombarded
on a heavy nucleus, it splits in two nearly

equal light fragments.

(2)

This reaction is possible at ordinary
temperature and ordinary pressure.

(3)

In one fission reaction nearly 190 MeV
energy is released.

'H+\H+1H +1H > jHe + 298 + 2u+ energy (26-7 MeV)

‘+1

(four hydrogen) (helium) (positron) (neutrino)

Thus in this process, four hydrogen nuclei
fuse to form a helium nucleus with a release
of 26:7 MeV energy.

(2) The working of hydrogen bomb is
based on nuclear fusion in which a high
temperature (~ 10’ K) required for the fusion
reaction is obtained by the bombardment of the
nuclear bomb.

(3) Although it appears that the energy
released in nuclear fusion is much less than
that released in nuclear fission, but indeed it
is not so. For a given mass, the energy
released due to fusion of light nuclei is much
more than the energy released due to fission
of same mass of a heavy nucleus. The reason
is that for the same mass, the number of light
nucleus is much more than the number of
heavy nucleus. Hence the energy obtained per
unit mass in fusion is much larger than the
energy obtained per unit mass in fission. This
is why scientist are engaged in getting energy
by the process of fusion of deuterium which
can be obtained in abundance from the sea
water at a very low cost. But the main
difficulty is that at 107 K, the substance get

ionised i.e., it is in the plasma state and it is

very difficult to store it.

Nuclear fusion

(1) In fusion, at very high temperature and

high pressure two light nuclei combine to |

form a heavy nucleus.

(2) This reaction is possible only at a very
high temperature (~ 107 K) and a very

high pressure.
(3)

In one fusion reaction nearly 24-7 MeV
energy is released.


===== PAGE 23 =====

(4) For the same mass, the energy released in (4)
the fission process is less than that in the
fusion process.

(5) The fissionable substance is radioactive, so (5)
it gives out the harmful radiations and it
creates problem in disposal of its waste.

(6) The fissionable substance is found within (6)
limit.

(7) Fission process can be controlled. Nuclear | (7)
reactor is based on the controlled fission
reaction.

(8) Nuclear bomb is based on _ the (8)
uncontrolled fission reaction.

i

Calculate the amount of energy released in MeV
due to a loss of mass of 1 kg.

Given : Am = 1-0 kg, c=3 x 108 ms"!

According to Einstein’s mass-energy equivalence

E = (Am)c*
= 1:0 x (3 x 108)? = 9 x 10!6 joule
9x10'° per i
= 16x10 MeV = 5-625 x 1079 MeV

(since 1 MeV = 1-6 x 10-9 joule)

Calculate the loss in mass equivalent to the

energy 1-0 x 106 kWh.

Given : E = 1-0 x 10° kWh = 10° x 3-6 x 10° joule
= 3-6 x 10!? joule

(since 1 kWh = 3-6 x 10° joule)

From Einstein’s mass-energy equivalence, loss in

E
mass equivalent to energy E is Am = —
c

36x10" ’
T =4x 105 kg

on = (3x08)

If in nuclear fission of a piece of uranium, 0°5 g |

mass is lost, how much energy in kWh is
obtained ?
Given : loss in mass Am = 0-5 g = 0-5 x 10° kg
The energy released in fission
E = (Am)c? = (0-5 x 10) x 3 x 108? J
= 4-5 x 10! joule
Since 1 kWh = 3-6 x 10° joule,

For the same mass, the energy released in
fusion process is much more than that in |
fission process.

The fusionable substance is not |
radioactive, so it does not give out any |
harmful radiation and disposal of its waste |
is also not difficult.
The fusionable substance is found in
abundance.
Fusion reaction cannot be controlled. This
is why fusion reactor could not be
constructed so far.
Hydrogen bomb is based on the
uncontrolled fusion reaction.

= —

_ 45x10
~ 3.6x10°
If 190 MeV energy is released due to fission of
each nucleus of U-235, what mass of U-235
undergoes fission per hour in a reactor of power
300 MW ?
Take 1 a.m.u. = 1-66 x 10-77 kg.
Given : power of reactor = 300 MW = 300 x 10° W
Energy obtained in one hour (or 3600 s) from the

kWh = 1-25 x 107 kWh

reactor = power x time
= (300 x 10°) x (3600) = 1-08 x 10! J
-(i)
Energy released due to fission of one U-235 nucleus
= 190 MeV
= 190 x 1-6 x 10°38 J = 3-04 x 10! J
(ii)

From eqns. (i) and (ii),

Number of U-235 nuclei fissioned per hour
_ _108x10
~ 304x107"

Since mass of 6-02 x 1073 U-235 nuclei is 235 g

.. Mass of 3-55 x 10 nuclei

235
ae a 2 = 13.9 o
er x 3-55 x 10% = 13-9 g

= 3-55 x 107

In a nuclear fusion reaction, the loss in mass is
0-3%. How much energy is released in the fusion
of 1 kg mass ?


===== PAGE 24 =====

od

Given : mass lost in fusion reaction Am = 0-3%
.. Loss in mass in fusion of 1 kg mass

03
= 500 x 1 kg = 0-003 kg

1. What do you mean by nuclear energy ? What is
responsible for its release ?

2. Write down the Einstein’s mass-energy equivalence
relation, explaining the meaning of each symbol
used in it.

3. (a) What is am.u ? Express 1 a.m.u. in MeV.

(b) Write the approximate mass of a proton,
neutron and electron in a.m.u.

4. What is nuclear fission ? Name the particle used for
it. Write one fission reaction.

5. (a) Name two isotopes of uranium.

(b) Which of the isotope mentioned in part (a)
above is easily fissionable ? Give reason.
(c) State whether the neutron needed for
fission reaction of the isotope mentioned in
part (b) above, is slow or fast ?

6. Write the approximate value of the energy released
in the fission of one nucleus of 733U. What is the
reason for it ?

7. Complete the following nuclear fission reactions :

(a) 3U+ln > ,Ba+"Kr +3 jp +......

(b) 33U + In > “8La + Br +...... in + energy

Ans. (a) 33U + in — 1'Ba +$2Kr + 3 [yr + energy

(b) 3U+ln > 48La + SBr + 3in + energy

8. What do you mean by the chain reaction in nuclear
fission ? How is it controlled ?

9. State two uses of nuclear fission.

10. Give two differences between the radioactive decay
and nuclear fission.
ll. (a) What is nuclear fusion ? Give one example
and write its nuclear reaction.

(b) What other name is given to nuclear fusion ?
Give reason.

12. Why is a very high temperature required for the
process of nuclear fusion ? State the approximate
temperature required.

(a) Write one nuclear fusion reaction.

(b) State the approximate value of energy released
in the reaction mentioned in part (a).

(c) Give reason for the release of energy stated in
part (b).

13.

Energy released E = (Am)c* = 0-003 x (3 x 108)?
= 2-7 x 10" joule.

14. Complete the following fusion reactions :
(a) 3He +7H — ,He + ,H + energy
(b) 73H+7H — He +'n + energy
Ans. (a) 3He + 7H — $He + /H + energy
(b)?7H+7H -» 3He + hn + energy
15. (a) Name the process, nuclear fission or nuclear

fusion, in which the energy released per unit
mass is more ?

(b) Name the process, fission or fusion which is
possible at ordinary temperature.

16. (a) State one similiarity in the process of nuclear

fission and fusion.

(b) State two differences between the process of
nuclear fission and fusion.

17. Give two examples of nuclear fusion.
18.
19. Name the following nuclear reactions :

(a) 3U + in + BSr+'BXe+3 n+y

What is the source of energy of sun or stars ?

(vb) 3H+7H — fHe+In+y
Ans. (a) fission (b) fusion
MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE

1. The particle used in nuclear fission for bombardment
is:
(a) alpha particle (b) proton
(c) beta particle (d) neutron. Ans. (d) neutron
2. The temperature required for the process of nuclear
fusion is nearly :

(a) 1000 K (b) 10*K
(c) 10°K (d) 107K Ans. (d) 107 K
NUMERICALS

1. In fission of one uranium-235 nucleus, the loss in
mass is 0-2 a.m.u. Calculate the energy released.

Ans. 186-2 MeV

2. When four hydrogen nuclei combine to form

a helium nucleus in the interior of sun, the loss in

mass is 0-0265 a.m.u. How much energy is

released ? Ans. 24-7 MeV
