

===== PAGE 1 =====

Refraction of Light
at Plane Surfaces

SYLLABUS

ja Reon of light through a glass block and a triangular prism, qualitative treatment of simple applic
such as real and apparent depth of objects in water and apparent bending of sticks in water. Application of
tefraction of light.
Scope of syllabus : Partial reflection and refraction due to change in medium. Laws of refraction, the effect on |
speed (V), wavelength (A) and frequency (f) due to refraction of light, conditions for a light ray to pass undeviated.
Values of speed of light (c) in vacuum, air, water and glass; refractive index 1 = c/V, V = fA. Values of pt for
common substances such as water, glass and diamond, experimental verification; refraction through glass block;
lateral displacement; multiple images in thick glass plate/mirror; refraction through a glass prism; simple
applications: real and apparent depths of object in water; apparent bending of a stick under water. Simple numerical
problems and approximate ray diagrams required.

(ii) Total internal reflection; Critical angle; examples in triangular glass prisms; comparison with reflection fom

a plane mirror (qualitative only). Application of total internal reflection.

Scope of syllabus : Transmission of light from a denser medium (glass/water) to a rarer medium (air) at if er
angles of incidence; critical angle S 1. = in C, essential conditions for total internal reflection. bid i

2 , 90°); use of right angle prism to obtain 6 = 90° and 180° (ray diagram); combate of total intemal
os a prism and reflection from a plane mirror. Le

(A) REFRACTION, LAWS OF REFRACTION AND REFRACTIVE INDEX

In class IX, we have read the reflection of
light from the plane and spherical mirrors. The
return of light in the same medium after striking
a surface is called reflection of light. The
reflection of a light ray obeys two laws : (i) the
angle of reflection is equal to the angle of
incidence, and (ii) the incident ray, the normal at
the point of incidence and the reflected ray, all
lie in one plane. Here we shall study the
refraction of light through the plane and spherical
surfaces.

Light has the maximum speed in vacuum and
it travels with different speeds in different media.
It travels faster in air than in water or
in glass. The speed of light is 3 x 108 m s* in
air, 2-25 x 108 m s“! in water and 2 x 108 m $7
in glass. The speed of light is constant in a
transparent homogeneous medium.

While passing from one medium to the other,
if light slows down, the second medium is said
to be optically denser* than the first medium and
if light speeds up, the second medium is said to
be optically rarer than the first medium. Thus
water and glass are optically denser than air (or
air is optically rarer than water and glass).
Similarly, glass is optically denser than water (or
water is optically rarer than glass).

4.1 REFRACTION OF LIGHT

Partial reflection and refraction at the
boundary of two different medium : In a
transparent medium although light travels in a

* Optical density has no relation with the density of medium. Kerosene

is less dense than water (as it floats on water), but it is optically denser
than water. Optical density of a medium depends on the speed of
light in that medium, while the density of a medium depends on its
inter-molecular separation.


===== PAGE 2 =====

straight line path, but when a ray of light
travelling in one transparent medium strikes
obliquely at the surface of another transparent
medium, a part of light comes back to the same
medium obeying the laws of reflection and is
called the reflected light. The remaining part of
light passes into the other medium and travels in
a straight path different from its initial direction
and is called the refracted light.

Thus, at the boundary separating the two
media, light suffers a partial reflection and partial
refraction. Thus

In Fig. 4.1 and Fig. 4.2, SS' is the surface
separating the two media (say, air and glass).
When light travelling in one medium falls on the
surface SS', a small part of it is reflected back
in the same medium obeying the laws of
reflection and the rest of it is refracted through
the other medium i.e., there is a partial reflection
and partial refraction at the boundary surface.
The intensity (or the amplitude) of the refracted
light will obviously be less than that of the
incident light because a part of the incident light
has suffered reflection.

In Fig. 4.1 and 4.2, for the incident ray AO,
the refracted ray is OB, the reflected ray is OC
and the normal at the point of incidence O is
NOM. The angle of incidence i is ZAON and the
angle of refraction r is ZBOM. Note that the
angle r is not equal to the angle i (i.e., OB is not
in direction of OA).

It has been experimentally observed that

(1) When a ray of light travels from a
rarer medium to a denser medium (say, from
air to glass), it bends towards the normal (i.e.,
Zr < Zi) as shown in Fig. 4.1. The deviation*
of the ray (from its initial path) is 8 =i-r.

** Deviation means the angle between the direction of refracted

ray and the direction of incident ray. It is denoted by the letter 8.

Fig. 4.1 Refraction from rarer to denser medium

(2) When a ray of light travels from a
denser medium to a rarer medium (say, from
glass to air), it bends away from the normal (i.e.,
Zr > Zi) as shown in Fig. 4.2. The deviation of
the ray is then 6 = r—i.

A c

% e

e g
a |
GLASS y

(DENSER)
AIR (RARER) ©

Say,

‘N
\B

eee 4

=

Fig. 4.2 Refraction from denser to rarer medium

(3) The ray of light incident normally on the
surface separating the two media, passes
undeviated (i.e., such a ray suffers no bending at
the surface). Thus if angle of incidence Zi = 0°,
then angle of refraction Zr = 0° as shown in
Fig. 4.3. The deviation of the ray is zero (i.e.,
() = 0°). A

INCIDENT
RAY

Zi = 0° | go°

AIR (RARER) MEDIUM 1

GLASS OR O| MEDIUM 2
WATER Zr=0°
(DENSER)
REFRACTED
RAY

B

Fig. 4.3 Refraction at normal incidence

Note : In discussing refraction now onward,
the reflected ray from the boundary surface
will not be shown although it is always there.



===== PAGE 3 =====

Cause of refraction (or cause of change in
direction)

When a ray of light passes from one medium
to another medium, its direction (or path)
changes because of change in speed of light in
going from one medium to another. In passing
from one medium to other, if light slows down,
it bends towards the normal and if light
speeds up, it bends away from the normal.
‘For normal incidence (Zi = 0°), the speed of
light changes but the direction of light does
not change.

4.2 LAWS OF REFRACTION

The refraction of light obeys two laws of
refraction which were given by the Dutch scientist
Willebrod Snell, so they are known as Snell’s
laws after his name. They are :

(1) The incident ray, the refracted ray and the
normal at the point of incidence, all lie in
the same plane.

(2) The ratio of the sine of the angle of
incidence i to the sine of the angle of
refraction r is constant for the pair of given
media. i.e., mathematically

The constant is called the refractive index
of the second medium with respect to the first
medium. It is generally represented by the
Greek letter ,1, (mew).

w(4.1)

Refractive index

STS

Unit : The refractive index has no unit as it
is the ratio of two similar quantities.

4.3 SPEED OF LIGHT IN DIFFERENT MEDIA;
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN REFRACTIVE
INDEX AND SPEED OF LIGHT (1 = c/V)

The speed of light is maximum in vacuum
and is equal to 3 x 108 m s"!*. The speed of
light in air is nearly same as in vacuum. It is
denoted by the symbol c. In any other transparent
media, the speed of light is less than that in air
(or vacuum).

The refractive index of a medium is generally
defined with respect to vacuum (or air), and it is
called the absolute refractive index (or simply the
refractive index) of the medium. It is denoted by
the letter p.

The refractive index of a medium is defined
as the ratio of the speed of light in vacuum
(or air) to the speed of light in that medium,
i.e,

(4.2)

The refractive index of a transparent medium
is always greater than 1 (it can not be less
than 1), because speed of light in any medium is
always less than that in vacuum (i.e., V < c).

Examples : (1) The speed of light in air is
3x 108ms-! and in glass it is 2 x 108 m s“!,
therefore the refractive index of glass is
3x108
2x108

(2) The speed of light in water is 2:25 x 108
m s~!, so the refractive index of water is

3x108 4

Maer Zasxagh @ 3 7233

(3) The refractive index of diamond is 2-41,
it means that light travels in air 2-41 times faster
than in diamond.

glass = 15

The refractive index of some common
transparent substances are given in the table
ahead.

* — Precisely the speed of light in vacuum is 299,792,458 m s"'.


===== PAGE 4 =====

Refractive index (u) of some common substances

In general, the refractive index of second
medium with respect to first medium is
related to the speed of light in the two media as
follows :

« (4.3)

where ,H, represents the refractive index of
medium 2 with respect to medium 1.

If V, is the speed of light in medium 1 and V, is
the speed of light in medium 2, then from eqn. (4.3),

w+ (4.4)

Here 1, and 1, are the absolute refractive indices
of the medium 1 and 2 respectively.

Examples : (1) Refractive index of glass with
respect to water is
_ Speed of light in water
water"glass = “Speed of light in glass
_ 225x108

* son

or waterglass =

(2) Refractive index of water with respect to
glass is
_ Speed of light in glass
glass water ~ Speed of light in water
_ 2-0 x 10°

= = 0-89
2-25 x 108

Note : If the refractive indices of medium
1 and medium 2 are same, the speed of light
will be same in both the media, so a ray of
light will pass from medium 1 to medium 2
without any change in its path even when the
angle of incidence in medium 1 is not zero.

Conditions for a light ray to pass undeviated
on refraction
A ray of light passes undeviated from
medium 1 to medium 2 in either of the following
two conditions :
(1) When the angle of incidence at the
boundary of two media is zero (i.e.,
Zi = 0°) as shown in Fig. 4.3.
(2) When the refractive index of medium 2
is same as that of medium 1 (Fig. 4.4)
ie); FH %.

Fig. 4.4 No deviation if 1, = 1, = B (say)

Effect on speed (V), wavelength (A) and
frequency (f) due to refraction of light

1. When a ray of light gets refracted from a
rarer to a denser medium, the speed of light
decreases; while if it is refracted from a
denser to a rarer medium, the speed of light
increases.

2. The frequency of light depends on the source
of light, so it does not change on refraction.

If V is the speed of light in a medium and A
is the wavelength of light in that medium,

the frequency of light is given as f= .

or (4.5)


===== PAGE 5 =====

3. When light passes from a rarer to a denser
medium, the wavelength decreases (since
speed of light decreases, but its frequency
remains unchanged). When light passes from
a denser medium to a rarer medium, the
speed of light and hence its wavelength
increases.

If a ray of light of frequency f and
wavelength A suffers refraction from air (speed of
light = c) to a medium in which the speed of
light is V, then the frequency of light in the
medium remains unchanged (equal to f), but the
wavelength of light changes to X’ such that in air

c
ad

and in medium f =

Yd .

Obviously when light passes from a rarer to a
denser medium (1 > 1), its wavelength decreases
(\’ < A), but if light passes from a denser to a
rarer medium ( < 1), its wavelength increases
(V’ > A).

Note : Due to change in speed of light in
refraction from one medium to other, the direction
of ray of light changes except for Zi = 0°.

Factors affecting the refractive index of a
medium

The refractive index of a medium depends on
the following three factors :

(1) Nature of the medium i.e. its optical
density : As smaller the speed of light in a
medium relative to air, higher is the refractive
index of that medium. For example

Votass = 2 X 108 m s“!, Hgtass = 1:5 and

Vovater = 2°25 x 108 ms}, Water = 1-33.

Physical condition such as temperature :

With increase in temperature, the speed of

light in medium increases, so the refractive

index of medium decreases.

[Secs

(2)

(3) The colour or wavelength of light : The
speed of light of all colours is same in air
(or vacuum), but in any other transparent
medium, the speed of light is different for
different colours. In a given medium, the
speed of red light is maximum and that of
the violet light is least, therefore the
refractive index of that medium is maximum
for violet light and least for red light (i.e.,
Hy > Hp). The wavelength of red light is
more than that of violet light, so refractive
index of a medium decreases with the
increase in wavelength.

4.4 PRINCIPLE OF REVERSIBILITY OF
THE PATH OF LIGHT

According to this principle, the path of a light
ray is reversible.

In Fig. 4.5, a ray of light AO is incident at
an angle i on a plane surface SS” separating the
two media 1 and 2. It is refracted along OB at
an angle of refraction r. The refractive index of
medium 2 with respect to medium 1 is

_ Hy _ sini VY
He = Ty = sing = ¥,

Fig. 4.5 Principle of reversibility

Now if the refraction takes place from the
medium 2 to 1, the principle of reversibility
requires that the ray of light incident along BO
at O at an angle of incidence r in medium 2 will
get refracted only along OA at an angle of
refraction i in medium 1 and in no other direction
than OA. The refractive index of medium 1 with
respect to medium 2 is then

_ th _sinr_ V2


===== PAGE 6 =====

From eqns. (i) and (ii),

sin i

sini
My * oh = Sin *

or ws (4.7)

or « (4.8)

Thus, if refractive index of glass with respect
to air is 1, = >, the refractive index of air with
respect to glass will be .u, = ts = 2.

; H F
Note : From relation jp, = a the refractive
1
index of glass with respect to water is
Me 3/2 _ 9

Hw

w=
and refractive index of water with respect to glass
Hy _ 4/3 _ 8

= 43 8

Bbw 3/2

4.5 EXPERIMENTAL VERIFICATION OF
LAWS OF REFRACTION AND
DETERMINATION OF REFRACTIVE
INDEX OF GLASS

Procedure :

(1) Place a rectangular glass block on a white

sheet of paper fixed on a drawing board and

draw its boundary line PQRS with a pencil

as shown in Fig. 4.6.

Remove the block and on the boundary line

PQ, take a point O nearly at its middle and

then draw a normal NOM on the line PQ at

the point O.

Draw a line AO inclined at an angle i (say,

40°) to the normal NOM.

Replace the block exactly on its boundary

line.

Fix two pins a and b vertically on the board,

about 5 cm apart, on the line AO.

Now looking from the other side RS of the

block by keeping the eye close to the plane

oF Or

(2)

(3)
(4)
(5)

(6)

of the board, fix two more pins c and d such
that the base of all the four pins a, b, c and
d appears to be in a straight line as seen
through the block.

Then remove the pins one by one and mark
the position of each pin with a fine pencil
dot. Remove the block and join the points c
and d by a line BC to meet the boundary
line RS at a point B. Join the points O and
B by a straight line which gives the path of
light ray inside the glass block.

Here AO represents the incident ray, OB the
refracted ray through the block and BC the
emergent ray. NOM is the normal at the
point of incidence O, ZAON is the angle of
incidence i and ZBOM is the angle of
refraction rf.

(7)

Fig. 4.6 Verfication of laws of refraction
(8) Measure the angles i and r. Read the values
of sin i and sin r from the sine table and
calculate the ratio sin i/sin r. This ratio is
constant and it gives the refractive index of
glass.

Alternative method ; In order to verfiy the
law of refraction without measuring the angles i
and r, draw a circle of suitable radius with the
point O as centre which intersects the incident ray
AO at D and the refracted ray OB at E. Draw
normals DF and EG on NOM from the points D
and E respectively. Measure the length of the


===== PAGE 7 =====

normals DF anu ow rimu vrybu. ims rauo' is ~

constant and it gives the refractive index of glass
because

In right-angled AOFD, sin i= DE
and in right-angled AOGE, sin r = £&
_ sini _ DF/OD
~ sinr ~ EG/OE
But OD = OE, being the radii of the same circle.
_ DE
t= a6

(9) Repeat the steps (3) to (8) of the experiment
for different values of angle of incidence i
equal to 50°, 60°, 70°, 80° and in each case,

- sini DF
find the ratio snr ° EG"
(10) Record your observations in a table shown

below :

From the above observation table, we find that

, in i DF
the ratio ae or FG comes out to be a constant

for each value of angle i. This verifies the second
law of refraction. The ratio so obtained is equal
to the refractive index 1 of glass, the material of
the block. Thus, the refractive index of glass
can be determined.

Further, the incident ray AO, the normal NOM
at the point of incidence O and the refracted ray
OB are in the plane of paper (i.e., in the same
plane). This verifies the first law of refraction.

4.6 REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH A
RECTANGULAR GLASS BLOCK

Fig 4.7 shows a rectangular glass block
PQRS. A light ray AO falls on the surface PQ.
NOM is the normal to the surface PO at the point

‘Or mcidence VU. At tne surrace PQ, the ray AO

enters from air (rarer medium) to glass (denser
medium), so it slows down and bends towards the
normal NOM. It travels inside glass in a
straight path along OB. At the surface RS, the ray
OB suffers another refraction. N,BM, is the
normal to the surface RS at the point of incidence
B. The ray OB now enters from glass (denser
medium) to air (rarer medium), so it speeds up
and bends away from the normal N,BM,. It
travels along BC in air. The ray AO is called the
incident ray, OB the refracted ray and BC the
emergent ray. The ZAON is the angle of
incidence i, the ZBOM is the angle of
refraction r and the ZCBM, is the angle of
emergence e. Since refraction occurs at two
parallel surfaces PQ and RS, therefore,
ZMOB = ZN,BO and Zi = Ze i.e., the angle
of incidence i is equal to the angle of
emergence e by the principle of reversibility of
the path of a light ray. Thus, the emergent ray
BC is parallel to the incident ray AO.

Fig. 4.7 Refraction through a rectangular glass block

Lateral displacement

In Fig. 4.7, we observe that due to refraction
of light at two parallel surfaces of a parallel sided
glass block, the angle of incidence is equal to the
angle of emergence, so the incident ray AO and
the emergent ray BC are parallel (i.e., they are
in same direction), but they are not along the
same line. The emergent ray is laterally displaced
from the path of incident ray. The path of incident
ray AO in absence of glass block has been shown


===== PAGE 8 =====

in Fig. 4.7 by the dotted line OD. The
perpendicular distance XY (= x) between the path
of emergent ray BC and the direction of incident
ray OD is called the lateral displacement.

The lateral displacement x depends on*

(i) the thickness of block (or medium),

(ii) the angle of incidence, and

(iii) the refractive index of glass, and therefore

also on the wavelength of light used.
(i) Dependence on the thickness of
medium : More the thiickness of the
medium, more is the lateral displacement.
(ii) Dependence on the angle of incidence :
More the angle of incidence, more is the
lateral displacement.
(iii) Dependence on the refractive index :
More the refractive index of the medium,
more is the lateral displacement. Since
refractive index increases with the
decrease in wavelength of light, so the
lateral displacement increases with the
decrease in wavelength of light (i.e.,
lateral displacement is more for violet
light than for red light).

4.7 MULTIPLE IMAGES IN A THICK PLANE
GLASS PLATE OR THICK MIRROR

If a pin (or an illuminated object) is placed
in front of a thick plane glass plate (or a thick
mirror) and is viewed obliquely, a number of
images are seen. Out of these images, the second
image is the brightest, while others are of
decreasing brightness.

In Fig. 4.8, LMNP represents a thick plane
mirror of which NP is the silvered surface. An
illuminated object A is kept in front of it.

tsin (i—r)
cos r
block, i = angle of incidence, r = angle of refraction.

* — Lateral displacement = where f = thickness of glass

Fig. 4.8 Multiple reflections in a thick mirror

Consider two rays, one falling normally on the
mirror and the other AB falling obliquely on it.
When the ray of light AB falls on the surface LM
of the mirror, a small part of light (nearly 4%)
is reflected in the direction BP, forming a faint
virtual image at A,, while a larger part of light
(nearly 96%) is refracted along BB’ inside the
glass. The ray BB’ which strikes at B’, is now
strongly reflected back by the silvered surface PN
inside glass as B’C. This ray is then partially
refracted along CQ in air and partially reflected
along CC’ within the glass. The refracted ray CQ
forms the virtual image A,. The image A, is the
brightest image because it is due to the light
suffering a strong first reflection at the silvered
surface PN.

The reflected ray CC’ further suffers multiple
reflections at C’, D, D’, ... and refractions at D,
E, F, within the thickness of glass plate
giving rise to multiple virtual images A,, A,, As,
of gradually decreasing brightness.

Note : (1) In Fig. 4.8 due to drawing, the
rays BP, CQ, appear to be far separated
from each other, but actually they enter the eye
simultaneously.

(2) A thick glass plate also behaves like a
thick plane mirror.



===== PAGE 9 =====

1. A ray of light in passing from one transparent
medium to the other medium having different
optical density, bends.

(a) Name the phenomenon. Give reason for it.

(b) How do the following quantities change :
speed, wavelength, frequency and amplitude if
second medium is denser than the first
medium.

(c) State whether the ray of light will bend or not,
if both medium have same optical densities.

(a) Refraction.

The reason of bending (or refraction) is the change
in speed of light in passing from one medium to
other of different optical density.

(b) Speed will decrease.

Wavelength will decrease.

Frequency will remain unchanged.

Amplitude will decrease (due to partial reflection at
the boundary of two media).

(c) The ray will not bend.

2. A ray of light falls normally on a glass slab. Draw
diagram showing the path of the ray till it
emerges out of the slab. What is the angle of
incidence and angle of refraction at each surface
of slab ?

The ray diagram is shown in Fig. 4.9 in which the
light ray passes undeviated throught the slab.

Incident ray

Refracted

Emergent ray

Fig. 4.9
At each surface of glass slab,
angle of incidence = 0°
and angle of refraction = 0°
3. ‘The refractive index of water is 4/3’. Explain the
meaning of this statement.

It means that the speed of light in water is 3/4" the
speed of light in vacuum (or air). OR the speed of

light in air (or vacuum) is 4/3 times the speed of
light in water.

4. Refractive index of water is 4/3. Calculate the
speed of light in water. Speed of light in vacuum
is 3x10? ms

Refractive index of water ;
speed of light in vacuum

speed of light in water
4 3x10°
3 ~ Speed of light in water

or Speed of light in water = 3 x (3 x 108)
= 2-25 x 108 ms.

5. The refractive index of water is ‘ and of glass is

3. What is the refractive index of glass with

respect to water ?
: 4 3

Given : gl, = 3> ap =

«. Refractive index of glass with respect to water

refractiveindex of glass

wits = refractive index of water
= tae BIR Be a
FE Dy, ag ge

6. Orange light of wavelength 6600 A travelling in
air gets refracted in water. If the speed of light in
air is 3 x 108 ms“ and refractive index of water
is 4/3, find : (i) the frequency of light in air, (ii)
the speed of light in water, and (iii) the
wavelength of light in water.

Given : A,;, = 6600 A = 6600 x 107! m,
c=3x 108 mst, p=43

(i) From relation c = f A (in air)

Frequency of light in air f,;, = 7

e -fe 3x108 =
ar 6600x107
= 4:54 x 104 Hz.
(ii) From relation p = 3
co: ec _ 3x108
Speed of light in water V = = 4B
= 2-25 x 108 ms!

(iii) Since the frequency of light remains unchanged in
refraction, $0 fyater = Sri = 454 x 10!4 Hz

Now speed of light in water V = fyater  Awater

SaaS


===== PAGE 10 =====

-. Wavelength of i in water

_ 225.108
"water = a 4-54 x10!4
= 4-95 x 10-7 m or 4950 A
dai 6600 A
Alternative : Ayater = Tae’ = gq = 4950 A

7. A ray of light strikes a glass slab 5 cm thick,

making an angle of incidence equal to 30°.

(a) Draw a ray diagram showing the emergent
ray and the refracted ray through the glass
block. The refractive index of glass is 1-5.

(b) Measure the lateral displacement of the ray.
Take sin 19-5° = 1/3.

Given : 1 = 1-5, i= 30°

Let us first calculate the angle of refraction r.

=u
sin30° 1
sin Tae = 15 = aa = 3

or r= 19-5° (since sin 19-5° = 1/3)

The ray diagram is given in Fig 4.10. The refracted

ray is drawn with angle of refraction 19-5° and

emergent ray is drawn parallel to the incident ray.

From Snell's law, =—

REFRACTED
RAY

Fig. 4.10 " ateral displacement

(b) Lateral displacement =

8. The diagram below shows a glass block
suspended in a liquid. A beam of light of single
colour is incident from liquid on one side of the
block.

1 cm nearly (on proper scale).

LIQUID LiquID

LIGHT BEAM

Fig. 4.11

Le

(a) Draw diagrams to show how does the light
bend when it travels from liquid to glass and
then to liquid if (i) the light slows down in
glass, and (ii) the light speeds up in glass.

(b) State two conditions under which the light ray
passing from liquid to glass travels straight
without bending. Will the glass be visible
then ?

(a) (i) If light slows down in going from liquid to glass,
it means that p glass > Vriquiar SO it will bend towards the
normal at the point of incidence in passing from liquid to
glass at the first surface, while it will bend away from the
normal at the second surface in passing from glass to
liquid. The ray diagram is shown in Fig. 4.12. The light
beam suffers lateral displacement.

LIQUID

Fig. 4.12

(ii) If light speeds up in going from liquid to glass,
it means that p glass < Miiquia SO it will bend away from the
normal at the point of Tncidence on the first surface in
passing from liquid to glass, while it will bend towards
the normal at the second surface in passing from glass to
liquid. The ray diagram is shown in Fig. 4.13. The light
beam suffers lateral displacement in direction opposite to
that in case (i).

LIQUID

Fig. 4.13

Note : In both cases, the emergent ray is parallel to
the incident ray.

(b) A light ray passing from liquid to glass travels
straight without bending under the following two
conditions:

(1) When the light ray falls normally on glass from
liquid (i.e., if Zi = 0°, Zr = 0°).

(2) When refractive index of liquid is same as that of
glass (or speed of light in glass is same as in liquid).
In both the above conditions, the glass block will
not be visible inside the liquid.


===== PAGE 11 =====

9.

(i)
(ii)

(iii)

(i)
(ii)

The diagram below shows two parallel rays A

and B of red and violet light respectively incident

from air on air-glass boundary. Complete the

diagram showing the refracted rays for them in
the glass.

A B

RED VIOLET

AIR
GLASS
Fig. 4.14
How do the speeds of the rays differ in glass ?

Are the two refracted rays in glass parallel ?
Give a reason for your answer.

How does the refractive index of glass differ for
the two rays ?

The completed ray diagram is shown below in
Fig. 4.15.

AIR

GLASS

Fig. 4.15

In glass, the speed of violet light is less than that of
the red light.

The two refracted rays inside glass are not parallel.
The reason is that the speed of red light in glass is
less, while it is more for the violet light, so the red
ray bends less, while the violet ray bends more (i.e.,
the angle of refraction r, for red ray is more than the
angle of refraction r, for the violet ray).

What do you understand by refraction of light ?
Draw diagrams to show the refraction of light
from (i) air to glass, and (ii) glass to air. In each
diagram, label the incident ray, refracted ray, the
angle of incidence (i) and the angle of refraction (7).
A ray of light is incident normally on a plane glass
slab. What will be (i) the angle of refraction, and
(ii) the angle of deviation for the ray ?

Ans. (i) 0°, (ii) 0°
An obliquely incident light ray bends at the surface
due to change in speed, when passing from one
medium to other. The ray does not bend when it is

(iii) Since pp = c/V, so the Tefractive index of glass is

10.

(b)

(c)

more for the violet light than for the red light (i.e.,
Hy > Hp).

Fig. 4.16 shows a A

ray of light AO

incident on a 0
rectangular glass
block PQRS, which
is silvered at the ¢ R
surface RS. The ray SILVERED SURFACE

is partly reflected Fig. 4.16

and partly refracted.

Draw the path of the reflected and refracted rays.
Show at least two rays emerging from the surface
PQ after reflection from the surface RS.

How many images are formed in the above
case ? Which image is the brightest ?

The completed
diagram is shown
in Fig. 4.17 in
which OB is the
reflected ray and
oc is the
refracted ray for
the incident ray
AO.

Two rays emerging from the surface PQ after
reflections from the surface RS are labelled as
1 and 2.

Multiple (or infinite) images are formed. The
second image formed due to first reflection at C at
the silvered surface RS, is the brightest. It is seen in
the direction of ray 1.

SILVERED SURFACE
Fig. 4.17

incident normally. Will the ray have different speed

in other medium ? Ans. Yes

What is the cause of refraction of light when it

passes from one medium to another ?

A light ray suffers reflection and refraction at the

boundary in passing from air to water. Draw a neat

labelled ray diagram to show it.

A ray of light passes from medium 1 to medium 2.

Which of the following quantities of the refracted

ray will differ from that of the incident ray :

speed, intensity, frequency, and wavelength ?

Ans. Speed, intensity and wavelength
le nl

a Ee)



===== PAGE 12 =====

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

State the Snell’s laws of refraction of light.
Define the term refractive index of a medium. Can
it be less than 1 ?
How is the refractive index of a medium related to
the speed of light in it ?
A light ray passes from water to (i) air, and
(ii) glass. In each case, state how does the speed of
light change.
Ans. (i) The speed of light increases
(ii) The speed of light decreases.
A light ray in passing from water to a medium
(a) speeds up, (b) slows down. In each case, (i) give
one example of the medium, (ii) state whether the
refractive index of medium is equal to, less than or
greater than the refractive index of water.
Ans. (i) (a) air (b) glass,
(ii) (a) less than, (b) greater than
What do you understand by the statement 'the
refractive index of glass is 1-5 for white light’ ?
A monochromatic ray of light passes from air to
glass. The wavelength of light in air is A, the speed
of light in air is c and in glass is V. If the refractive
index of glass is 1:5, write down (a) the relationship
between c and V, (b) the wavelength of light in glass.
Ans. (a) c= 1-5 V (b) A/1-5
In an experiment of finding the refractive index of
glass, if blue light is replaced by the red light, how
will the refractive index of glass change ? Give
reason in support of your answer.
(a) For which colour of white light, is the refractive
index of a transparent medium (i) the least,
(ii) the most ?
(b) Which colour of light travels fastest in any
medium except air ?
Ans. (a) (i) Red (ii) Violet, (b) Red
Name two factors on which the refractive index of
a medium depends ? State how does it depend on
the factors stated by you.
How does the refractive index of a medium depend
on the wavelength of light used ?
Ans. Refractive index of a medium decreases with
increase in wavelength of light.
How does the refractive index of a medium depend
on its temperature ?
Ans. Refractive index decreases with increase in
temperature of medium.
In Fig. 4.18, a ray of light A incident from air suffers
partial reflection and refraction at the boundary of
water.

21.

22.

(a) Complete the diagtam a
showing (i) the
reflected ray B and :
(ii) the refracted ray C. AX

(b) How are the angles of Water
incidence i and
refraction r related ?

Fig. 4.18

Ans. (b) sin i/sin r =p,

The diagram alongside :

shows the refraction of a

ray of light from air to a

liquid.

(a) Write the values of
(i) angle ofincidence,
and (ii) angle of
refraction.

(b) Use Snell’s law to find the refractive index of
liquid with respect to air.

3
Ans. (a) (i) 60°, (ii) 45°, 2 or 1-22
The refractive index of water with respect to air is

ally and of glass with respect to air is gig. Express
the refractive index of glass with respect to water.

LIQUID

Fig. 4.19

ally
aly
What is lateral displacement ? Draw a ray diagram
showing the lateral displacement of a ray of light
when it passes through a parallel sided glass slab.
A ray of light strikes the surface of a rectangular
glass slab such that the angle of incidence in air is
(i) 0°, (ii) 45°. In each case, draw diagram to show
the path taken by the ray as it passes through the
glass slab and emerges from it.

Ans. wl =

In the adjacent diagram, AO is
a ray of light incident on a
rectangular glass slab.

(a) Complete the path of the
ray till it emerges out of
the slab.

(b) In the diagram, mark the

angle of incidence (i) and

the angle of refraction (r) at the first interface.

How is the refractive index of glass related to

the angles i and r?

Mark angle of emergence by the letter e. How

‘are the angles i and e related ?

(d) Which two rays are parallel to each other ?
Name them.

(e) Indicate in the diagram the lateral displacement

Fig 4.20

(c)


===== PAGE 13 =====

between te emergent ray “ana the incident ray: °
State one factor that affects the lateral
displacement.
26. A ray of green light enters a liquid from air, as
shown in Fig. 4.21. The angle 1 is 45° and angle 2
is 30°.

PLANE MIRROR
Fig. 4.21

(a) Find the refractive index of liquid.

(b) Show in the diagram the path of the ray after it
strikes the mirror and re-enters in air. Mark in
the diagram the angles wherever necessary.

(c) Redraw the digaram if plane mirror becomes
normal to the refracted ray inside the liquid.
State the principle used.

Ans. (a) V2 or 1-41

27. Light of a single colour is passed through a liquid
having a piece of glass suspended in it. On changing
the temperature of liquid, at a particular temperature
the glass piece is not seen.

(i) When is the glass piece not seen ?
(ii) Why is the light of a single colour used ?

Ans. (i) The glass piece is not seen when the refractive
index of liquid becomes equal to the refractive
index of glass.

(ii) Light of a single colour is used because the
refractive index of a medium (glass or liquid) is
different for the light of different colours.

28. When an illuminated object is held in front of
a thick plane glass mirror, several images are seen,
out of which the second image is brightest. Give
reason.

29. Fill i we Dranks-to complete the following
sentences :
(a) When light travels from a rarer to a denser
medium, its speed
(b) When light travels from a denser to a rarer
medium, its speed
(c) The refractive index of glass with respect to air
is 3/2. The refractive index of air with respect to
glass will be...............+.
Ans. (a) decreases, (b) increases, (c) 2/3.

MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE
1. When a ray of light from air enters a denser
medium, it :
(a) bends away from the normal
(b) bends towards the normal
(c) goes undeviated
(d) is reflected back.
Ans. (b) bends towards the normal.
2. A light ray does not bend at the boundary in passing
from one medium to the other medium if the angle
of incidence is :

(a) O° (b) 45° (c) 60° (d) 90°. Ans. (a) 0°
3. The highest refractive index is of :

(a) Glass (b) Water

(c) Diamond (d) Ruby. Ans. (c) Diamond
NUMERICALS

1. The speed of light in air is 3 x 108 m s“!. Calculate
the speed of light in glass. The refractive index of
glass is 1-5. Ans. 2 x 108 ms!

2. The speed of light in diamond is 125,000 km s7!.
What is its refractive index ? (Speed of light in air
=3x 108 ms"). Ans. 2:4

3. The refractive index of water with respect to air is
4/3. What is the refractive index of air with respect
to water ? Ans. 0-75

A ray of light of wavelength 5400 A suffers
refraction from air to glass. Taking
the wavelength of light in glass.

abt, = 3/2, find
Ans. 3600 A

4.8 PRISM

A prism is a transparent medium bounded by
five plane surfaces with a triangular cross section.
Two opposite surfaces of prism are identical

parallel triangles, while the other three surfaces
are rectangular and inclined on each other.



===== PAGE 14 =====

Fig. 4.22 shows a prism in which the opposite
surfaces ABC and DEF are triangular. The
principal section of prism is the triangle ABC. The
ZBAC is the angle of prism, which is denoted by
the letter A. The two rectangular surfaces ABED
and ACFD shown shaded are the refracting
surfaces. The line AD is the refracting edge and
the rectangular surface BCFE is the base of the
prism, which is usually grounded or made rough.

REFRACTING D

EDGE
A

REFRACTING
SURFACE

REFRACTING
SURFACE

8 Cc
Fig. 4.22 Prism
Note : In ray diagrams, a prism is shown
only by its principal section ABC.

4.9 REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH A
GLASS PRISM

Fig. 4.23 shows the principal section ABC of
a glass prism. The angle of prism is ZBAC = A.
A monochromatic ray of light (i.e., a light ray of
single colour) OP strikes the face AB of the prism
at an angle of incidence i,. It suffers refraction
from air (rarer medium) to glass (denser medium)
at the face AB, so it bends towards the normal PN
making an angle of refraction r, and travels along
PQ inside the prism. Thus PQ is the refracted ray.
The refracted ray PQ strikes the face AC of the
prism at an angle of incidence r,. It suffers
refraction from glass (denser medium) to air (rarer
medium) at the face AC, so it bends away from the

A

Fig. 4.23 Deviation by a prism

normal NQ and emerges out of the prism as QR at
an angle of emergence i,. Thus QR is the emergent

Note : Due to the principle of reversibility
of path of a light ray, if a ray directed along RQ
is considered as the incident ray, it will follow
the path QPO. It means that for the incident ray
RQ, the emergent ray will be PO.

Thus in a prism, the ray of light suffers
refraction at two inclined faces AB and AC of the
prism. In each refraction, the ray bends towards
the base of the prism. At the first face AB of the
prism the ray OP, instead of going along OPM,
has bent at P along PQ, so suffers a deviation by
an ZMPQ equal to 5,. At the second face AC, the
ray PQ has bent at Q along QR which appears to
be coming along MQR, so suffers a deviation by
an ZMQP equal to 8,.

In the absence of the prism, the incident ray
OP would have travelled along OPML. The
emergent ray QR appears to be coming along
MQR. Thus the prism has produced a deviation by
an ZLMQ, which is the angle between the
direction of incident ray (OP produced forward)
and the emergent ray (QR produced backward). It
is called the angle of deviation and is denoted by
the greek alphabet 6 (delta).

In Fig. 4.23, Z LMQ = Z MPQ + Z MQP
Angle of deviation 5 = Z MPQ + Z MQP

=8, 46,0 aed (i)
Since Z MPN = i, (angle of incidence), and
Z MQN = i, (angle of emergence).*
Therefore Z MPQ = 6, =(i,-1,)
and ZMOQP = 8, = (i, -7,)
-. From eqn. (i), 8 = (i, -7,) + (,- 1)
or i : (4.9)

Also for the quadilateral APNQ in Fig 4.23,
ZAPN = ZAQN = 90°

* Sometimes angle of emergence is denoted by the letter e in
place of i,, then angle of incidence is written i in place of i,.


===== PAGE 15 =====

. ZPNQ + Z PAQ = 180°

But Z PAQ =A,
ZPNQ = 180°-A lan. (ii)
But in triangle PNQ,

ZPNQ = 180°-(r,+ 75)
-. From egns. (ii) and (iii),
[180° - (r, + r,)] = 180°-A

or

5 = (i, +i,)-A

or

Note : In a prism, the refraction of light
occurs at two inclined faces, so the emergent
ray is not parallel to the incident ray, but it is
deviated towards the base of prism. On the

other hand, in a parallel sided glass slab, the
refraction of light occurs at two parallel faces,
so the emergent ray is parallel to the incident
ray with a lateral shift.

Factors affecting the angle of deviation
The angle of deviation 6 (i.e., the deviation

produced by a prism) depends on the following
four factors :

(1) the angle of incidence (i),

(2) the material of prism (i.e., on refractive

index \1),
(3) the angle of prism (A), and
(4) the colour or wavelength (A) of light used.

(1) Dependence of angle of deviation on the

angle of incidence; i-6 graph ;

It is experimentally observed that as the angle

of incidence increases, the angle of deviation first

decreases, reaches to a minimum value for a

certain angle of incidence and then on further

increasing the angle of incidence, the angle of
deviation begins to increase.

* If angle of incidence is i and angle of emergence is e, then
eqn. (4.11) takes the form i+e=A+6.

Note : To get the graph showing the
variation of angle of deviation with the angle of
incidence experimentally, the direction of
incident ray is kept unchanged and the prism is
rotated. On rotation of prism, the direction of
normal at the face of prism changes, so the
angle which the incident ray makes with the
normal (i.e., the angle of incidence) changes.

The angle of deviation 5 is noted for each angle
of incidence i and then a graph is drawn for 6 vs i.
Fig. 4.24 shows the variation in angle of deviation
(5) with the angle of incidence (i). It is called the
i-8 curve in which the minimum value of angle of
deviation is marked as 8nin-

ANGLE OF DEVIATION (5) —>

ANGLE OF INCIDENCE (ij) —>
Fig. 4.24 i-6 curve

It is found that the angle of deviation becomes
minimum (8nin) When the angle of incidence is
equal to the angle of emergence i.e., when i, = i,
or when r, = r,. In Fig. 4.23, if A ABC is
equilateral (or equiangular), for r, = r,, the ray PQ
will be parallel to the base BC.

The position of prism with respect to the
incident ray at which the incident ray suffers
minimum deviation is called the position of
minimum deviation. Thus in the position of
minimum deviation, the refracted ray inside the
prism is parallel to its base, if the prism is
equilateral (or the principal section of prism forms
an isosceles triangle). In other words,

In the position of minimum deviation,
i.é., when 8= Spin, i, = i, = i (Say).
Then from eqn. (4.11),

(4.12)


===== PAGE 16 =====

For a given prism ‘ana~giveir corour or rpnit;’

Sin 18 unique since only one horizontal line can be
drawn parallel to i-axis at the lowest point of i-5
curve, i.e., only for one value of angle of
incidence i, the refracted ray inside the prism is
parallel to its base.

Deviation at different angles of incidence :
Fig. 4.25 shows the deviation of a light ray by an
equilateral prism of glass (u = 1-5) at different
angles of incidence. The values of different angles
can be calculated using the eqns. (4.1), (4.10) and
(4.11) with A = 60°. In Fig. 4.25(a), angle of
incidence i, = 70°, angle of emergence i, = 33°
and angle of deviation 5 = 43°. In Fig. 4.25(b),
i, = 48°, i, = 48° and 6 = 36°, while in
Fig. 4.25(c), i, = 30°, i, = 77° and 6 = 47°.

c
(b) When i, = 48° B ()Wheni, =30° ©
Fig. 4.25 Deviation by a equilateral prism
at different angles of incidence
From the ray diagrams shown in Fig. 4.25, it
can easily be inferred that 5 has the minimum

valine “in Fig: "4. Z5(by waren me ‘angle of incidence
i, is 48° and the refracted ray PQ is parallel to the
base BC of prism. In this condition, the angle of
emergence i, is also 48° (equal to the angle of
incidence i, ). In Fig. 4.25(b), the angle of
minimum deviation is

8 nin = 21-A = 2 x 48° — 60° = 36°.

(2) Dependence of angle of deviation on the
material of prism (or refractive index)

It is found that for a given angle of incidence,
the prism with a higher refractive index produces
a greater deviation than the prism which has a
lower refractive index. A flint glass prism
produces more deviation than a crown glass prism
of same refracting angle since Lint > Merown’

(3) Dependence of angle of deviation on the
angle of prism*

It is found that the angle of deviation (8)
increases with the increase in the angle of
prism (A).

(4) Dependence of angle of deviation on the
colour (or wavelength) of light

The refractive index of a given transparent
medium is different for the light of different
colours. It decreases with the increase in the
wavelength of light. Thus the refractive index of
the material of a prism is maximum for the violet
light and minimum for the red light. Consequently,
a given prism deviates the violet light most and the
red light least (i.€.,8,ije¢ > Seq SINCE Uyiotet > Hea)”

* For small angle of prism A, angle of deviation 8 = (—1)A.

1. Fig. 4.26 alongside shows an equilateral prism
ABC and the ray QR emerging out from the
prism after suffering minimum deviation.
Complete the diagram to show the refracted ray
PQ inside the prism and the incident ray OP on
the prism. State in words how have you
completed the diagram.


===== PAGE 17 =====

The completed diagram is shown below in Fig. 4.27.

Fig. 4.27

Way of drawing :

(1) The refracted ray PQ is drawn parallel to the base
BC of the prism since the emergent ray QR has
suffered minimum deviation.

After drawing normals on face AB of prism at P and
on face AC of prism at Q, the incident ray OP is
drawn such that the angle of incidence i, is equal to
the angle of emergence i,.

(2)

In Fig. 4.28, a monochromatic point source of
light S is viewed by an observer O through
a prism P. Complete the diagram to show the
image formed by the prism and as seen by the
observer O. Label the image by the letter I.

mS
P OBSERVER
Fig. 4.28

The completed ray diagram is shown in
Fig. 4.29. Two rays SA and SL from the source of
light S, are incident on the prism. They are refracted
along AB and LM respectively from the first face
of the prism. The rays AB and LM again get
refracted from the second face of the prism and
emerge out of the prism along BC and MN
respectively such that they appear to come from a
point I. Thus I is the image of the point source S.
In other words, the observer O sees the source S
raised to the position I.

Fig. 4.29

Fig. 4.30 shows two identical prisms P and Q placed
with their faces parallel to each other. A light ray
of yellow colour AB is incident at the face of

the prism P. Complete the diagram to show the
path of the ray till it emerges out of the prism Q.

P
Fig. 4.30
The completed diagram is shown in Fig. 4.31 in
which the ray CD emerging out of the prism Q is
parallel to the ray AB incident on the prism P.

Q

D

P Q
Fig. 4.31

Fig. 4.32 below shows a light ray of green colour
incident normally on the prisms A, B and C. In
each case, draw the path of the ray of light as it
enters and emerges out of the prism. Mark the
angle wherever necessary.

(c)

(b)
Fig. 4.32

The completed diagrams are given in Fig. 4.33.

Note : (i) The light ray incident normally on a
surface gets refracted without deviation.

(ii) The light ray in passing from air to prism
obliquely bends towards the normal at the point
of incidence.

(iii) The light ray in passing from prism to air
obliquely bends away from the normal at its point
of incidence.



===== PAGE 18 =====

1. What is a prism ?

With the help of a diagram of principal section of a
prism, indicate its refracting surfaces, refracting
angle and base.

2. The diagrams (a) and (b) in Fig. 4.34 below show

the refraction of a ray of light of single colour
through a prism and a parallel sided glass slab
respectively.

(a) (b)

Fig. 4.34
(i) In each diagram, label the incident, refracted,
emergent rays and the angle of deviation.

(ii) In what way the direction of emergent ray in the
two cases differ with respect to the incident
ray ? Explain your answer.

Define the term angle of deviation.

. Complete the following sentence :
Angle of deviation is the angle which the
ray makes with the direction of ............ Tay.

Ans. emergent, incident
. What do you understand by the deviation produced
by a prism ? Why is it caused ? State three factors
on which the angle of deviation depends.

(a) How does the angle of deviation produced by a
prism change with increase in the angle of
incidence. Draw a curve showing the variation
in the angle of deviation with the angle of
incidence at a prism surface.

Using the curve in part (a) above, how do you
infer that for a given prism, the angle of
minimum deviation 6,,,, is unique for the given
light.

State whether the following statement is ‘true’ or
‘false’ :

The deviation produced by a prism is independent of
the angle of incidence and is same for all colours of
light. Ans. False
. How does the deviation produced by a prism

depend on (i) the refraction index of its material, and
(ii) the wavelength of incident light.

(b)

10.

i.

12.

13:

14.

15.

16.

17.

How does the angle of minimum deviation produced
by a prism change with increase in (i) the
wavelength of incident light, and (ii) the refracting

angle of prism ? Ans. (i) decreases (ii) increases.
Write a relation for the angle of deviation (8) for a
ray of light passing through an equilateral prism in
terms of the angle of incidence (i,), angle of
emergence (i,) and angle of prism (A).
Ans. 8 = (i, + i,)-A
A ray of light incident at an angle of incidence i,
passes through an equilateral glass prism such that
the refracted ray inside prism is parallel to its base
and emerges at an angle of emergence i,.
(i) How is the angle of emergence ‘i,’ related to the
angle of incidence ‘i,’ ? (ii) What can you say about
the angle of deviation in such a situation ?
Ans. (i) i, = i; (ii) angle of deviation is minimum.

How is the angle of emergence related to the angle
of incidence when prism is in the position of
minimum deviation ? Illustrate your answer with the
help of a labelled diagram using an equilateral
prism.

A light ray of yellow colour is incident on an
equilateral glass prism at an angle of incidence equal
to 48° and suffers minimum deviation by an angle of
36°. (i) What will be the angle of emergence ?
(ii) If the angle of incidence is changed to (a) 30°,
(b) 60°, state in each case whether the angle of
deviation will be equal to, less than or more than
36° ?
Ans. (i) 48° (ii) (a) more than 36° (b) more than 36°

Name the colour of white light which is deviated
(i) the most, and (ii) the least, on passing through a
prism.

Ans. (i) violet (ii) red

Which of the two prisms, A made of crown glass
and B made of flint glass, deviates a ray of light
more ? Ans. B made of flint glass

How does the angle of deviation depend on the
refracting angle of the prism ?

An object is viewed through a glass prism with its
vertex pointing upwards. Draw a ray diagram to
show the formation of its image seen by the
observer.


===== PAGE 19 =====

18. A ray of light is normally incident on one face of an
equilateral glass prism. Answer the following :

(a) What is the angle of incidence on the first face
of the prism ?

(b) What is the angle of refraction from the first
face of the prism ?

(c) What will be the angle of incidence at the
second face of the prism ?

(d) Will the light ray suffer minimum deviation by
the prism ?
Ans. (a) 0° (ii) 0° (iii) 60° (iv) No

19. Fig. 4.35 below shows two identical prisms A and B
placed with their faces parallel to each other. A ray
of light of single colour PQ is incident at the face of
the prism A. Complete the diagram to
show the path of the ray till it emerges out of the
prism B.

Fig. 4.35

[Hint : The emergent ray out of the prism B will be
parallel to the incident ray PQ]

MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE

1. In refraction of light through a prism, the light ray:
(a) suffers refraction only at one face of the prism
(b) emerges out from the prism in a direction
parallel to the incident ray
(c) bends at both the surfaces of prism towards its
base
(d) bends at both the surfaces of prism opposite to
its base.
Ans. (c) bends at both the surfaces
of prism towards its base.
2. A ray of light suffers refraction through an
equilateral prism. The deviation produced by the
prism does not depend on the :
(a) angle of incidence (b) colour of light
(c) material of prism (d) size of prism.
Ans. (d) size of prism.
NUMERICALS

1. A ray of light incident at an angle of incidence 48°
on a prism of refracting angle 60° suffers minimum
deviation. Calculate the angle of minimum deviation.
[Hint : 5, = 2i- A] Ans. 36°

2. What should be the angle of incidence for a ray of
light which suffers minimum deviation of 36°
through an equilateral prism ?

(Hint : A = 60°, i= (A+ 8,,,,)/2] Ans. 48°

(C) SIMPLE APPLICATIONS OF REFRACTION OF LIGHT

4.10 REAL AND APPARENT DEPTH

An object placed in a denser ‘medium when
viewed from a rarer medium, appears

a depth lesser than its real depth. '
because of refraction of light.

In Fig. 4.36, consider a point abject € O bin at
the bottom of a transparent medium (such as water
or glass) separated from air by the surface PQ. A
ray of light OA, starting from the object O, is
incident on the surface PQ normally, so it passes
undeviated along the path AA’. Another ray OB,
starting from the object O, strikes the boundary
surface PQ at B and suffers refraction. Since the

ray travels from a denser medium (water or glass)
to a rarer medium (air), so it bends away from the
normal N’BN drawn at the point of incidence B on
the surface PQ and travels along BC in air.

Fig. 4.36 Real and apparent depth


===== PAGE 20 =====

Note : The point B is very close to the point
A, and both the rays OA’ and BC enter the eye
simultaneously. In Fig. 4.36, they have been
shown separately for the sake of clarity of the

ray diagram.

When viewed by the eye, the ray BC appears
to be coming from a point I which is the virtual
image of O, obtained on producing A’A and CB
backward. Thus any object (e.g. a coin) placed at
O, when seen from above (air), will appear to be
at I which is at a lesser depth (= AJ) than its actual
depth (= AO).

In Fig. 4.36, for the incident ray OB, angle of
incidence i = ZOBN’ and angle of refraction
r = ZCBN. Since AO and BN’ are parallel and OB
is a transversal line, so

ZAOB = ZOBN’ = i

Similarly, IA’ and BN are parallel and IC is the

transversal line, so

ZBIA’ = ZCBN =r
Now in right-angled triangle BAO,

sin i= Be
*= OB
and in right-angled triangle IAB,
sin r= BS
~ IB

But from the definition of refractive index, the
refractive index of air with respect to the medium
- _ BA/OB _ IB

mba = sin r ~ BA/IB ~ OB
Refractive index of medium with respect to air
1 OB
mula
Since the point B is very close to the point A,

ie., the object is viewed from a point vertically
above the object O, .. IB = IA and OB = OA.

aim =

Hence

(4.13)

or w(4.14)

Thus,

depth

ie =

raised, depends on :

(1) the refractive index of the medium,

(2) the thickness of the denser medium, and

(3) the colour (or wavelength) of incident light*.

(1) Dependence of shift on the refractive
index : Higher the refraction index of the
medium, more is the shift.

(2) Dependence of shift on the thickness of
medium : Thicker the medium, more is the
shift.

(3) Dependence on wavelength (or colour) of
light : The shift decreases with the increase
in the wavelength of light used. Since ty > Hp,
therefore the shift is more for the violet light
than for the red light in a given medium.

Examples

(i) For glass, , Pi 3, therefore the thickness of

glass slab appears only two-third of its real
thickness when it is viewed from air by
keeping the eye vertical above the slab.

(ii) For water, .H,, = <, therefore the depth of a

water pond appears three-fourth of its real depth
on seeing it from air in a nearly vertical direction
(i.e., it appears shallow). This is why a fish when
seen from air appears to be nearer the surface
of water than at its actual depth.

Note : The apparent depth of an object lying
in a denser medium is always less than its real
depth when viewed from any direction in the

rarer medium. But the above eqns. (4.13), (4.14)
and (4.15) are valid only when the object is
seen from vertically above.

* — The refractive index of a medium increases with the decrease

in wavelength of incident light (Uy, > Up).


===== PAGE 21 =====

4.11 APPARENT BENDING OF A STICK
UNDER WATER

Fig. 4.37 shows a straight stick (or pencil)
XOP placed obliquely in water. The portion OP
of the stick (or pencil) under water when seen
from air appears to be shortened and raised up
as OP’. This is due to refraction of light from
water to air. The rays of light coming from tip P
of the stick (or pencil) when pass from: water to
air, bend away from the normal and appear to be
coming from a point P’ which is the virtual
image of the point P. The same is true for every
point of the stick (or pencil) inside water from P

to O.
W EYE

(ease =n P acs ee
Fig. 4.37 Bending of stick due to refraction

Thus, the part PO of the stick (or pencil)
appears to be P’O, i.e., the immersed part of the
stick appears to be raised and therefore bent at
the point O on the surface of water and the stick
(or pencil) XOP appears as XOP’.

Note : An object placed in a rarer medium
when viewed from a denser medium appears to
be at a greater distance than its real distance.
In Fig. 4.38, an object O placed in air when
viewed from water appears to be at 1 which
is higher than the object O.

Fig. 4.38 An object in rarer medium
viewed from a denser medium

412 SOME CONSEQUENCES OF THE

REFRACTION OF LIGHT

In our daily life we come across many
phenomena which are caused by the refraction of
light. Some of these are given below :

(i) A star appears twinkling in the sky due to
change in refractive index of air with
temperature.

The sun is seen a few minutes before it rises

above the horizon in the morning while in

the evening few minutes longer after it sets.

A coin kept in a vessel and not visible when

seen from just below the edge of the vessel,

can be viewed from the same position when
water is poured into the vessel.

A print appears to be raised when a glass

slab is placed over it.

(v) A piece of paper stuck at the bottom of a
glass slab appears to be raised when seen
from above.

(vi) A tank appears shallow than its actual
depth.

(vii) A person's legs appear to be short when
standing in a tank.

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

1, As seen from above, the apparent depth of a
liquid in a vessel is 15 cm, when its real depth is
20 cm. Find the refractive index of the liquid.

Given, real depth = 20 cm, apparent depth = 15 cm.
fs laits real depth
Refractive index of the liquid = ‘apparent depth depth

als

= 1:33

2. A point source of light O of single colour is seen
through a rectangular glass slab PQRS. The
paths of two rays, in and outside the slab, are
shown in Fig. 4.39.

(i) In the diagram, label the position I of the
source O where it will appear when seen
through the surface RS.


===== PAGE 22 =====

(ii) Does the source O appear °
to be nearer or farther
with respect to the surface ,,
PQ?

(iii) How does the shift depend
on the thickness PS or QR
of the slab ?

(iv) Justify your answer in (ii)
with the help of an appropriate ray diagram.

(v) For the same rectangular glass slab, which
colour from the visible spectra (violet to red)
will produce the maximum shift ?

(i) In Fig. 4.40, I is the
position of source O when
seen through the surface
RS.

(ii) The source O appears to be
at I, nearer with respect to
the surface PQ when
viewed through the surface
RS.

(iii) The shift OI decreases with the decrease in
thickness PS or QR of the slab.

(iv) The ray diagram is shown in Fig. 4.40 in which
for the thickness PS, the image is at I, while for
the thickness PS’ (< PS), another emergent ray
(parallel to the given previous emergent ray) is
drawn and the image is at I’. Now the shift is OI
which is less than the shift OI for the thickness
PS of the slab.

(v) The same rectangular glass slab will produce

maximum shift for the violet light incident on
it for which the refractive index of glass is most.

Fig. 4.39

Fig. 4.40

. How is the refractive index of a medium related to
the real and apparent depths of an object in that
medium ?

. Prove that

Refractive index = feal dept,

apparent depth *
. A tank of water is viewed normally from above.
(a) State how does the depth of tank appear to
change.

Draw a labelled ray diagram to explain your
answer.

(b)

a5

43.

A glass slab is placed over a piece of paper on
which VIBGYOR is printed with each letter into
its corresponding colours.

(i) Will the image of all the letters be in the same
place ?

(ii) The letter of which colour will appear to be
raised (a) maximum, and (b) minimum ?
Explain your answer.

(i) No. The image of all the letters will not be in the
same place.

(ii) (a) The letter of violet colour (i.e., V) appears to
be raised maximum. (b) The letter of red colour
(i.e., R) appears to be raised minimum.

teal depth
refractive index
refractive index of glass is most for the violet

light while least for the red light, therefore the
apparent depth is least for the violet letter and
most for the red letter.

Reason : Apparent depth = and

A coin kept inside water (u = 4/3) when viewed
from air in a vertical direction, appears to be
raised by 2-0 mm. Find the depth of coin in
water.

4
Given: = 3° shift = 2-0 mm
Let real depth be x mm. Then

x

4/3
Shift = real depth — apparent depth

wie Bn BP
meee Cae

x 3
Apparent depth = a= =7%

x= 8-0 mm

1
iLe., ar =2:0mm ..

Thus depth of coin is water = 8-0 mm

Water in a pond appears to be only three-quarter of
its actual depth. (a) What property of light is
responsible for this observation ? Illustrate your
answer with the help of a ray diagram. (b) How is
the refractive index of water calculated from its real
and apparent depths ?

Draw a ray diagram to show the appearance of a
stick partially immersed in water. Explain your
answer.

A fish is looking at a 1-0 m high plant at the edge
of a pond. Will the plant appear to the fish shorter


===== PAGE 23 =====

or taller than its actual height ? Draw a ray diagram

to support your answer. Ans. Taller
7. A student puts his pencil into an empty trough and
observes the pencil from the position as indicated in
Fig. 4.41.
NI

Fig. 4.41

(i) What change will be observed in the appearance
of the pencil when water is poured into the
trough ?

(ii) Name the phenomenon which accounts for the
above stated observation.

(iii) Complete the diagram showing how the student’s
eye sees the pencil through water.

8. An object placed in one medium when seen from the
other medium, appears to be vertically shifted. Name
two factors on which the magnitude of shift depends
and state how does it depend on them.

MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE

1. A small air bubble in a glass block when seen from

above appears to be raised because of :

(a) refraction of light

(b) reflection of light

(c) reflection and refraction of light

(d) none of the above.

Ans. (a) refraction of light

2. An object in a denser medium when viewed from a

rarer medium appears to be raised. The shift is

maximum for :

(a) red light

(c) yellow light

(b) violet light
(d) green light.

Ans. (b) violet light
NUMERICALS

1. A water pond appears to be 2-7 m deep. If the
refractive index of water is 4/3, find the actual depth
of the pond. Ans, 3-6 m

2. A coin is placed at the bottom of a beaker containing
water (refractive index = 4/3) to a depth of 12 cm.
By what height the coin appears to be raised when
seen from vertically above ? Ans. 3 cm

3. A postage stamp kept below a rectangular glass slab
of refractive index 1-5 when viewed from vertically
above it, appears to be raised by 7-0 mm. Calculate
the thickness of the glass slab. Ans, 2-1 cm

(D) CRITICAL ANGLE AND TOTAL INTERNAL REFLECTION

4.13 TRANSMISSION OF LIGHT FROM A
DENSER MEDIUM (GLASS OR WATER)
TO A RARER MEDIUM (AIR) AT
DIFFERENT ANGLES OF INCIDENCE

Consider the refraction of light from a denser
medium to a rarer medium. When a light ray
travelling in a denser medium falls on the surface
separating it from a rarer medium, it is partly
reflected back into the denser medium and partly
refracted in the rarer medium. The refracted ray
bends away from the normal on the surface at the
point of incidence obeying the laws of refraction.
Now we shall consider this process of reflection
and refraction at different angles of incidence.

Case (i) when the angle of incidence is
small (i < C) : In Fig 4.42, a light ray AO

travelling in glass is incident at the glass-air
interface at a small angle of incidence i. It is
partly reflected and partly refracted. We get a
weak reflected ray OC and a strong refracted ray
OB. Since the incident ray bends away from the
normal when it suffers refraction from glass to

Fig. 4.42 Refraction from glass to air when i<C


===== PAGE 24 =====

air, therefore the angle of refraction r is greater
than the angle of incidence i.

Now if the angle of incidence i is gradually
increased, the angle of refraction r also increases,
but the intensity of refracted ray keeps on
decreasing. Finally the angle of refraction r
reaches its maximum value equal to 90° at a
certain angle of incidence i = C. Here C is called
the critical angle*.

Case (ii) when the angle of incidence is
equal to the critical angle (@ = C) : At angle of
incidence equal to the critical angle (i = C), the
angle of refraction becomes 90° as shown in
Fig. 4.43. The refracted ray is along the glass-air
interface and is very weak.

esoo---Z

r= 90° REFRACTED. RAY

Fig. 4.43 Refraction from glass to air wheni=C

In Fig. 4.43, for the incident ray AO at i = C,
the refracted ray is OB and the reflected ray is OC.

Case (iii) when the angle of incidence is
greater than the critical angle (i > C) :
Fig. 4.44 shows that for the incident ray AO at
an angle of incidence i greater than the critical
angle C, no refracted ray is obtained and the
incident ray is totally reflected as OC.

Fig. 4.43 Total reflection when i > C (no refraction)

* Symbol i, is also used to denote the critical angle.

eg.

= MA

4.14 CRITICAL ANGLE

We have read that when a ray of light passes
from a denser medium to a rarer medium, at a
certain angle of incidence i = C, the angle of
refraction becomes 90°, i.e, at i = C, r = 90°.
The angle C is called the critical angle. Thus,

a

4.15 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE

CRITICAL ANGLE AND
REFRACTIVE INDEX (u = 1/sin C)

In Fig. 4.43, AO is an incident ray from
glass to air at an angle of incidence i = C (critical
angle) for which the angle of refraction r is 90°.
Therefore, the refractive index of air with respect
to glass is

THE

= sin C
gta = Sin 90°
But sin 90° = 1 «. gta = sin C

But refractive index of glass with respect to air is
1

alg iz gla

denser medium with respect to the rarer medium,
we can calculate the critical angle C for that pair
of media.

Examples :
(1) For glass, refractive index 2 3
ah. = 2
sin C= a = 3
But sin 42°= , . C = 42°
(2) For water, refractive index ,u,, = :
i poe ee)
ines =a
But sin 49° = 3, . C= 49°


===== PAGE 25 =====

The table below gives the critical angle for
some substances with respect to air.

Critical angle for some substances with
respect to air

Factors affecting the critical angle

The critical angle for a given pair of media
depends on their refractive indices. But the
refractive index of a medium is affected by the
following two factors :

(1) the colour (or wavelength) of light, and
(2) the temperature.

Therefore the critical angle depends on the
above two factors.

(1) Dependence on the colour of light : The
refractive index of a transparent medium
decreases with the increase of wavelength
of light (it is most for the violet light and
least for the red light), therefore the
critical angle for a pair of media is least
for the violet light and most for the red
light ie. the critical angle increases with
the increase in wavelength of light.

(2) Dependence on temperature : On
increasing the temperature of medium, its
refractive index decreases, so the critical
angle for that pair of media increases.
Thus critical angle increases with an

increase in temperature.

4.16 TOTAL INTERNAL REFLECTION

When light travels from a rarer to a denser
medium, at all angles of incidence a part of it is
reflected and the rest of it is refracted at the
boundary surface. Thus both the reflection and
refraction occur simultaneously. On the other
hand, when light travels from a denser to a rarer

medium, under certain condition (when the angle
of incidence is greater than the critical angle), no
part of light is refracted, but the entire light is
reflected back in the same medium. In Fig. 4.45,
the light ray AO gets entirely reflected as OC
obeying the laws of reflection and it does not
suffer refraction. This phenomenon is called total
internal reflection.

Fig. 4.45 Total internal reflection when i >C
Thus,

Essential conditions for the total internal
reflection
There are following two necessary conditions
for the total internal reflection :
(1) The light must travel from a denser to a rarer
medium.
(2) The angle of incidence must be greater than
the critical angle for the pair of media.

Note : In the process of total internal reflection,
100% energy (or intensity) is reflected back. No
other device such as plane mirror, etc. produces
100% reflection (due to absorption and refraction
of some part of light). Due to this property, the
phenomenon of total internal reflection is used in
the construction of periscope, binocular and certain
types of camera in which a total reflecting prism
replaces a plane mirror for the reflection of light.



===== PAGE 26 =====

Refraction and total internal reflection of
light rays at different angles of incidence

Fig 4.46 shows the refraction of light rays
from a point source A kept in a denser medium
to a rarer medium at different increasing angles
of incidence.

For the ray AO, the angle of incidence is zero,
it is refracted as OA’.

For the ray AP, the angle of incidence i is less
than the critical angle C (i.e., i < C), it is partly
reflected as PB and partly refracted as PC at an
angle of refraction r > i.

For the ray AQ, the angle of incidence is
equal to the critical angle for the pair of media
(i.e., i = C), so it is partly reflected as QB’
and partly refracted as QC’ at the angle of
refraction r equal to 90°.

A’ c

(:
l
| RARER
| MEDIUM

DENSER
MEDIUM

Fig 4.46 Refraction and total internal reflection

For the ray AR, the angle of incidence is
greater than the critical angle (i.e., i > C), so it
is totally reflected as RB” at an angle of
reflection r = i, and no refraction occurs.

Note : The above phenomenon of refraction
and total internal reflection can easily be
demonstrated with the help of a laser pen source.
The main precaution is taken that the laser source
is not seen directly as it may damage the eyes.

4.17 TOTAL INTERNAL REFLECTION IN A
PRISM

Now we shall consider total internal reflection

in three different prisms : (1) 45°, 90°, 45° prism

(i.e., right angled isosceles prism or total

reflecting prism), (2) prism of each angle 60°

, Ss

(i.e., equilateral prism), and (3) 30°, 90°, 60°

prism (i.e., a right-angled prism).

(1) Total internal reflection through a
45°, 90°, 45° prism (or right-angled
isosceles prism)

Total reflecting prism : A prism having an
angle of 90° between its two refracting surfaces
and the other two angles each equal to 45°, is
called a total reflecting prism because the light
incident normally on any of its faces, suffers total
internal reflection inside the prism. Due to this
behaviour, a total reflecting prism is used for the
following three purposes :

(a) to deviate a ray of light through 90°,

(b) to deviate a ray of light through 180°, and

(c) to erect the inverted image without

producing deviation in its path.

(a) To deviate a ray of light through 90°

In Fig. 4.47,
ABC is a total
reflecting prism. A
beam of light is
incident normally
at the face AB. It
passes undeviated
into the prism and
strikes at the face
AC at an angle of Fig. 4.47 Deviation through 90°
incidence equal to 45°. For glass-air interface, the
critical angle is about 42°, therefore the beam of
light suffers total internal reflection at face AC
because the angle of incidence is greater than the
critical angle. The reflected beam inside the prism
then strikes the face BC, where it is incident
normally and therefore passes undeviated. As a
result, the incident beam gets deviated through 90°
emerging out through the prism. Fig. 4.47 shows
the path of two rays PQ and P’Q’ through the
prism and then out of it.

Note : By the principle of reversibility of
path of light, if light is incident normally on
the face BC of the prism, it will emerge out

from the face AB after suffering total internal
reflection at the face AC.



===== PAGE 27 =====

Use : This action of prism is used in a
periscope where a total reflecting prism is
preferred over a plane mirror.

(b) To deviate a ray of light through 180°

“In Fig. 4.48,
the beam of light
from the object
PQ falls normally
on the face AC
(i.e., hypotenuse)
of the prism, so it
enters undeviated
inside the prism
and strikes the
glass-air interface
AB of the prism. Since the beam of light is
travelling from glass to air at an angle of
incidence equal to 45° which is greater than the
critical angle (= 42° for glass-air), therefore the
beam of light suffers total internal reflection. The
reflected beam inside the prism strikes the face
BC at an angle of incidence equal to 45°, so it
again suffers total internal reflection. The beam
of light inside the prism now falls normally on
the face AC and therefore passes undeviated out
of the prism, forming the image P’Q’ of the
object PQ. The beam thus gets deviated by 90°
at each reflection and the total deviation due to
two reflections becomes 180°.

Use : This action of prism is used in a
binocular and camera to invert the image without
the loss of intensity.

p" Q’
IMAGE

Q
OBJECT
Fig. 4.48 Deviation through 180°

(c) To erect the inverted image without deviation

In Fig 4.49, the beam of light from the object
PQ is incident parallel to the face AC (i.e.,
hypotenuse) of the prism and strikes the face AB
of the prism. It suffers refraction from air to glass
and strikes the face AC of the prism travelling
from glass to air at an angle of incidence greater
than the critical angle (= 42°), therefore it suffers
total internal reflection. The beam inside the
prism now strikes the face BC at an angle of
incidence less than the critical angle hence it

suffers refraction from glass to air and bends
away from the normal. The beam emerges
parallel to the face AC. As a result of refraction,
on emergence the rays are inverted and for the
inverted object PQ, the erect image P’Q’ is
obtained. A prism when used in this manner is
called the erecting prism.

Fig. 4.49 Erecting prism

Use : This action of prism is used in a slide
projector.

(2) Total internal reflection through a prism
where each angle is 60° (i.e., equilateral
prism)

A prism of each angle 60° can be used to
deviate a light ray through 60° by total internal
reflection. Fig. 4.50 shows a prism ABC of each
angle 60°. A light ray PQ incident normally on
the face AB of the prism passes undeviated as QR
into the prism and it strikes the face AC at an
angle of incidence 60° at the point R. Now the
light ray QR suffers total internal reflection at the
glass-air interface, since the angle of incidence
(= 60°) is greater than the critical angle which is
42°, such that ZQRS is 120°. The ray RS
obtained after total internal reflection falls



===== PAGE 28 =====

normally on the face BC of the prism and 50 it
passes out undeviated through the face BC. Thus
ST is the emergent ray. From Fig. 4.50, it is clear
that the incident ray PQ has turned through an
angle of 60° towards the base from its initial
direction and it emerges out as ST.

(3) Total internal reflection and refraction of
light through a 30°, 90°, 60° prism (or right
angled prism)

A 30°, 90°, 60° prism A
can be used to deviate +
a light ray through an
angle less than 60° by
total internal reflection.
Fig. 4.51 shows a prism
ABC of angles 30°, 90°
and 60°. A light ray PQ
incident normally on the
face BC of the prism
(opposite to the 30°
refracting angle) passes
undeviated as QR into the
prism and it strikes the face AC at an angle of
incidence 60° at the point R. Now the light ray
QR suffers total internal reflection at the
glass-air interface since the angle of incidence
(= 60°) is greater than the critical angle which is
42°. The ray RS obtained after total internal
reflection is incident at the face AB of the prism
at an angle of 30°. This angle of incidence at
glass-air interface is less than the critical angle,
so the ray RS is refracted from glass to air as ST
with an angle of refraction greater than 30°. Thus
the emergent ray ST has turned through an
angle 5 (which is less than 60°) from the
direction of incident ray PQ.

P

Fig. 4.51 Deviation through

less than 60° by a 30°, 90°,
60° prism

Non occurance of total internal reflection
through a 30°, 90°, 60° prism : Jf a light ray
PQ is incident normally on the face AB or a part
of face AC of the prism ABC, it does not suffer
total internal reflection inside the prism and gets
refracted as RS obeying the laws of refraction as
shown in Fig. 4.52 (a) and (b). In each case, the
angle of incidence at the other face inside the

Fig. 4.52 No total internal reflection
through a 30°, 90°, 60° prism
prism is 30° which is less than the critical angle
(i.e., 42°).

Exception : A ray of
light incident normally
on hypotenuse of prism
below the foot of
perpendicular on it from
its opposite corner,
suffers total internal
reflection and gets
deviated by an angle
greater than 60°. In
Fig. 4.53, a light ray PQ
is incident normally on
the face AC (hypotenuse) of the prism in the
portion DC such that the point D is the foot of
perpendicular from B on AC. It passes undeviated
as QR inside the prism and strikes the face BC
of the prism at an angle of incidence 60° which
is greater than the critical angle (= 42°). The ray
suffers total internal reflection inside the prism as
RS. The reflected ray RS then strikes the face AB
at an angle of incidence 30°, so it suffers
refraction from glass to air and emerges out of
the prism as ST, bending away from the normal
at the face AB. Thus the incident ray PQ gets
deviated through an angle greater than 60°.

418 USE OF A TOTAL INTERNAL
REFLECTING PRISM IN PLACE OF A
PLANE MIRROR

A total reflecting prism is used in place of a
plane mirror to deviate the light ray by 90° in a
periscope and by 180° in a binocular as well as
in a camera. The reason is that due to total

Fig. 4.53 Total internal
reflection through a
30°, 90°, 60° prism


===== PAGE 29 =====

internal reflection in the prism, the entire incident
light (100%) is reflected back into the denser
medium, whereas in ordinary reflection from a
plane mirror, some light is refracted and absorbed,
so the reflection is not 100%. Thus the image
obtained by the use of a total reflecting prism, is
much brighter than that obtained by using a plane
mirror. Further the brightness of image formed by
a total reflecting prism always remains unchanged,
while due to deterioration of silvering of the
plane mirror after a long use, the image formed
by it becomes faint.

Distinction between the total internal reflection
and reflection from a plane mirror

1. It takes place only when _| 1. It takes place when

light passes from a denser light is incident on

medium to a rarer medium a plane mirror from
at an angle of incidence any medium at any

greater than the critical angle of incidence.

angle for that pair of media.

Only a part of light is
reflected while rest is
refracted and absorbed.
3. There is a loss of
energy. The energy

2. The entire light is reflected. | 2.

3. There is no loss of energy.
The energy of reflected

tay is same as that of the of reflected ray is
incident ray. always less than that
of the incident ray.

4. The image is much brighter.) 4. The image is less bright

and the brightness remains and the brightness
unchanged even after the gradually decreases as
long use of the total the silvering on mirror

reflecting device. becomes old and rough.

4.19 SOME CONSEQUENCES OF TOTAL
INTERNAL REFLECTION

In our daily life, we observe many
consequences of total internal reflection. Some of
these are given below :

(1) On a hot sunny day, a driver may see a
pool of water (or wet road) in front of
him at some distance. It is the
phenomenon of mirage which is often
observed in desert.

An empty test tube placed in water in a
beaker with mouth outside the water
surface, shines like a mirror when seen at
certain angles.

A crack in a glass vessel often shines like
a mirror.

A piece of diamond sparkles when viewed
from certain directions.

An optical fibre is used to transmit a light
signal over a long distance without the
loss of energy. However, some energy gets
lost due to absorption of light in its
material.

(2)

(3)
(4)

(5)

1. Fig. 4.54 shows the section of a semi-circular
glass slab having its centre at O. Three rays of
light A, B and C of the same colour are incident
on the slab and strike on the edge XY at the
point O. The light ray B suffers refraction along
OB’.

(a) On the diagram, mark the critical angle by C.
(b) The rays enter the slab undeviated. Give
reason.

(c) Draw the path of rays A and C after they
strike the edge XY.

(d) Name the phenomenon which the rays A and
C exhibit.

(a) In Fig. 4.55, the critical angle has been marked
as C which is the angle of incidence for the
ray B.

(b) Each of the ray A, B and C is incident normally
on the slab along its radius, so it enters the slab
undeviated.


===== PAGE 30 =====

(c) Fig. 4.55 Shows the path of the tays A afid’C | ““ ““(b) State the principle used ‘for completing the

after they strike the edge XY as OA’ and OC’ ray diagram in part (a) above.
respectively.
A B
Fig. 4.57
(a) The completed ray diagram is given below in

Fig. 4.58.

Fig. 4.55

(d) The ray A suffers refraction from glass to air
while the ray C suffers total internal reflection.

Note : The partially reflected ray for A and B
has not been shown in Fig. 4.55.

2. Show with the aid of a ray diagram, how a right
angled isosceles prism can be used to invert the
rays. (a) How should the rays fall on the prism ?

(b) Which phenomenon is responsible for this Fig. 4.58

action of prism ? (c) What is the nature of the (b) The following nwo principles have been used :
teenage te faatien ame object = " 2 (i) The ray of light falling normally on the
The use of a right-angled isosceles prism to invert glass-air surface or air-glass surface, passes
the rays is shown in Fig. 4.56. undeviated through it (i.e., i = 0°, r = 0°).

(ii) The ray of light travelling from glass, when
strikes the glass-air surface at an angle of
incidence equal to 45° which is greater than
the critical angle (= 42° for glass-air), suffers
total internal reflection.

4. The critical angle for material of which the
equiangular prism ABC shown in Fig. 4.59 is
made, is 60°. A ray of light incident on the side
AB of the prism is refracted along DE such that
the angle it makes with the side AC is 150° and
ZEDB = 90°. Draw the path of the incident ray

Fig. 456 on the side AB (which travels along DE) and also
(a) The light rays must fall normally on the the path which the ray DE travels from the point
hypotenuse of the prism. E onwards.
(b) It is based on the phenomenon of total internal
reflection. A
(c) In Fig. 4.56, for the inverted object PQ, the Df
image P'Q' is upright.
3. (a) Fig. 4.57 shows two isosceles right angled ay
prisms A and B and the light rays incident on 8 c
the prism A. Complete the diagram to show Fig. 4.59

the rays emerging out of the prism B.


===== PAGE 31 =====

The completed diagram is shown in Fig. 4.60. Since
the refracted ray DE is normal to the surface AB of
the prism (i.e. Zr = 0°), so the incident ray at the
point D should also be normal to the surface AB so
that Zi = 0°. At the point E, the angle of incidence
for the ray DE is 150° - 90° = 60° which is equal
to the critical angle, so the ray DE is refracted at
90°, i.e., it is refracted along EC.

Note : Partial reflection of the ray DE has not been
shown.

al

N

4.

5.

7.

°

Explain the term critical angle with the aid of a
labelled diagram.

How is the critical angle related to the refractive
index of a medium ?

State the approximate value of the critical angle for
(a) glass-air surface (b) water-air surface.
Ans. (a) 42° (b) 49°

What is meant by the statement ‘the critical angle
for diamond is 24°” ?

A light ray is incident from a denser medium on the
boundary separating it from a rarer medium at an
angle of incidence equal to the critical angle. What
is the angle of refraction for the ray ?

Ans. 90°

Name two factors which affect the critical angle for
a given pair of media. State how do the factors
affect it.

The critical angle for glass-air is 45° for the light of
yellow colour. State whether it will be less than,
equal to, or more than 45° for (i) red light, and
(ii) blue light ?

Ans. (i) more than 45° (ii) less than 45°

(a) What is total internal reflection ?

(b) State two conditions necessary for the total
internal reflection to occur.

(c) Draw diagrams to illustrate the total internal
reflection.

Fill in the blanks to complete the following
sentences :

(a) Total internal reflection occurs only when a ray
of light passes from a .......... medium to a
Sehneesaaaediey medium.

10.

il.

12.

(b) Critical angle is the angle of ........... in denser
medium for which the angle of ....... in rarer
medium is ...........

Ans. (a) denser, rarer, (b) incidence, refraction, 90°

State whether the following statement is true or
false ? If the angle of incidence is greater than the
critical angle, light is not refracted at all, when it
falls on the surface from a denser medium to a rarer
medium. Ans. True
The refractive index of air with respect to glass is
sini
expressed as WL, = ain”
(a) Write down a similar expression for ally in terms
of the angles i and r.
(b) If angle r = 90°, what is the corresponding
angle i called ?
(c) What is the physical significance of the angle i
in part (b) ? ;
sin r ee
Ans. (a) aee= Gna? (b) critical angle,
(c) If angle of incidence exceeds the value of i
obtained in part (b), total internal reflection occurs.

Fig. 4.61 shows a point source P inside a water
container. Three rays A, B and C starting from the
source P are shown up to the water surface.
(a) Show in the diagram the path of these rays after
striking the water surface. The critical angle for



===== PAGE 32 =====

13.

14.

15.

16.

water-air surface is 48°. (b) Name the phenomenon
which the rays A, B and C exhibit.

In Fig. 4.62, PQ and PR are the two light rays
emerging from an object P. The ray PQ is refracted
as QS.

Fig. 4.62

(a) State the special name given to the angle of
incidence ZPQN of the ray PQ.

(b) What is the angle of refraction for the refracted
ray QS ?

(c) Name the phenomenon that occurs if the angle
of incidence ZPQN is increased.

(d) The ray PR suffers partial reflection and
refraction on the water-air surface. Give reason.

(e) Draw in the diagram the refracted ray for the
incident ray PR and hence show the position of
image of the object P by the letter P’ when seen
vertically from above.
Ans. (a) Critical angle (b) 90° (c) Total internal

reflection (d) For the ray PR, angle of incidence is

less than ZPQN (i.e., the critical angle).

The refractive index of glass is 1-5. From a point P

inside a glass slab, draw rays PA, PB and PC

incident on the glass-air surface at an angle of

incidence 30°, 42° and 60° respectively.

(a) In the diagram show the approximate direction
of these rays as they emerge out of the slab.

(b) What is the angle of refraction for the ray PB ?
(Take sin 42° = 2 ) Ans. (b) 90°

A ray of light enters a
glass slab ABDC as A ° B

shown in Fig. 4.63 and y

strikes at the centre O of

the circular part AC of the

slab. The critical angle of c D
glass is 42°. Complete the Fig. 4.63

path of the ray till it

emerges out from the slab. Mark the angles in the
diagram wherever necessary.

What is a total reflecting prism ? State three actions
that it can produce. Draw a diagram to show one
such action of the total reflecting prism.

17. Show with the help of a diagram how a total
reflecting prism can be used to turn a ray of light
through 90°. Name one instrument in which such a
prism is used.

18. A ray of light OP passes

through a right angled prism

as shown in the adjacent

diagram (Fig. 4.64).

(a) State the angles of
incidence at the faces
AC and BC.

(b) Name the phenomenon
which the ray suffers at the face AC.

Ans. (a) Angle of incidence at the face AC = 45°
and angle of incidence at the face BC = 0°
(b) The ray suffers total internal reflection at

the face AC.

19. In Fig. 4.65, a ray of light PQ is, P

incident normally on _ the 90°

hypotenuse of an isoceles right

angled prism ABC. (a) Complete

the path of the ray PQ till it B c

emerges from the prism. Mark in Fig. 4.65

the diagram the angle wherever

necessary. (b) What is the angle of deviation of the

ray PQ ? (c) Name a device in which this action is

used. Ans. (b) 180°, (c) Binocular
20. In Fig. 4.66, a ray of light

PQ is incident normally on
the face AB of an
equilateral glass prism.
Complete the ray diagram
showing its emergence into
air after passing through
the prism. Take critical
angle for glass = 42°.

(a) Write the angles of incidence at the faces AB
and AC of the prism.

(b) Name the phenomenon which the ray of light
suffers at the face AB, AC and BC of the prism.
Ans. (a) At the face AB, i = 0° and at the face AC,
i= 60°
(b) At the face AB — refraction,
at the face AC — total internal reflection,
at the face BC — refraction.
21. Draw a neat labelled ray diagram to show the total
internal reflection of a ray of light normally incident
on one face of a 30°, 90°, 60° prism.

Raa ee th


===== PAGE 33 =====

22. Two isosceles right-angled glass prisms P and Q are | 25. State one advantage of using a total reflecting prism
placed near each other as shown in Fig. 4.67. as a reflector in place of a plane mirror.

Complete the path of the light ray entering the
prism P till it emerges out of the prism Q. MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE

+ 1. The critical angle for glass-air interface is :
(a) 24° (b) 48° (c) 42°. (dd) 45°.
Ans. (c) 42°
2. A total reflecting right angled isosceles prism can be
P
Q

used to deviate a ray of light through :

Fig. 4.67 (a) 30° (b) 60° (c) 75° (d) 90°.

23. What device other than a plane mirror can be used Ans. (d) 90°
to tum a ray of light through 180° ? Draw a diagram | 3, total reflecting equilateral prism can be used to
in support of your answer. Name an instrument in deviate a ray of light through :
which this device is used. 5 < me m

24. Mention one difference between the reflection of eer Oe ee we Ans. (d) 60°

light from a plane mirror and total internal reflection
of light from a prism.

