

===== PAGE 1 =====

(A) MAGNETIC EFFECT OF ELECTRIC CURRENT

10.1 OERSTED’S EXPERIMENT ON THE
MAGNETIC EFFECT OF ELECTRIC
CURRENT

Hans Oersted, in 1820, in his experiments
observed that when an electric current is passed
through a conducting wire, a magnetic field is
produced around it. The presence of magnetic field
at any point around the current carrying wire can
be detected with the help of a campass needle.

In absence of any magnetic field, the needle
of compass can rest in any direction. But in
presence of a magnetic field, the needle of
compass rests only along the direction of the
magnetic field. In the earth’s magnetic field alone,
the needle rests only along the north-south
direction.

Experiment : In Fig. 10.1, AB is a wire
lying in the north-south direction and connected
to a battery through a rheostat and a tapping key.
A compass needle is placed just below the wire.

Observations : (1) When the key is open i.e.,
no current passes through the wire, the needle
points in the N-S direction (i.e.,along the earth’s
magnetic field) with the north pole of needle
pointing towards the north direction. In this

w
BATTERY
th RHEOSTAT, |
rw BY N
E

COMPASS

B
S\N (a) Key open and compass needle kept
+ below the wire

B
S*-"(b) Key closed and compass needle kept
+ below the wire

A 5 B
me N (c) Current reversed and compass needle
+)- kept below the wire
ALs_§ B
N (d) Compass needle placed above the
sol wire
A f B
s (d) Current reversed and compass needle

kept above the wire
Fig. 10.1 Oersted experiment on the magnetic
effect of current


===== PAGE 2 =====

position, the needle is parallel to the wire as
shown in Fig. 10.1 (a).

(2) When the key is pressed, a current
passes in the wire in the direction from A to B
(i.e., from south to north) and the north pole (N)
of the needle deflects towards the west
[Fig. 10.1 (b)]. If current in the wire is increased,
the deflection of the needle also increases.

(3) When the direction of current in the wire
is reversed by reversing the connections at the
terminals of the battery, the north pole (N) of the
needle deflects towards the east [Fig. 10.1 (c)].

(4) If the compass needle is placed just above
the wire, the north pole (N) deflects towards east
when the direction of current in wire is from A
to B [Fig. 10.1(d)], but the needle deflects
towards west as shown in Fig. 10.1 (e) if the
direction of current in wire is from B to A.

Explanation : The above observations of the
experiment suggest that a current carrying
wire produces a magnetic field around it and
the magnetic needle of compass experiences
a torque in this magnetic field, so it deflects to
align itself in the direction of magnetic field at
that point. On increasing current in the wire, the
deflection of the compass needle increases which
implies that the strength of magnetic field around
the wire increases. On reversing the direction of
current in the wire, the direction of deflection of
the magnetic needle of compass reverses because
the direction of magnetic field reverses.

Inference : A current (or moving charge)
produces a magnetic field around it. This is called
the magnetic effect of current. The strength of
magnetic field depends on the magnitude of
current and its direction depends on the direction
of current.

10.2 MAGNETIC FIELD AND FIELD LINES
DUE TO CURRENT IN A STRAIGHT
WIRE

When a current is passed through a
conducting wire, a magnetic field is produced
around it. At a point, the direction of magnetic

ae |

field will be along the tangent drawn on the
magnetic field line at that point. The magnetic
field lines can be drawn by means of iron filings
as follows.

Experiment : Take a sheet of smooth
cardboard with a hole at its centre. Place it
horizontal and pass a thick copper wire XY
vertically through the hole. Connect an
ammeter A, battery B, rheostat Rh and a key K
between the ends X and Y of the wire as shown
in Fig. 10.2. Sprinkle some iron filings on the
cardboard and pass an electric current through the
wire by inserting the plug in the key K. Gently
tap the cardboard.

COMPASS
NEEDLE

CARDBOARD

Fig. 10.2 Magnetic field lines around a straight
current carrying wire
It is observed that the iron filings get arranged
along the concentric circles around the wire as
shown by the dotted lines in Fig. 10.2.

If a small compass needle is placed anywhere
on the board near the wire, the direction in which
the north pole of needle points, gives the direction
of magnetic field at that point which is marked
by an arrow on the field line.

From the magnetic field lines patterns, we
note that

(1) The magnetic field lines form the
concentric circles around the wire, with
their plane perpendicular to the straight
wire and with their centres lying on the
wire.

When the direction of current in the wire
is reversed, the pattern of iron filings does
not change, but the direction of deflection
of the compass needle gets reversed. The

aero.

(2)


===== PAGE 3 =====

north pole of the compass needle now
points in a direction opposite to the
previous direction showing that the
direction of magnetic field has reversed.

(3)

On increasing current in the wire, the
magnetic field lines become denser and
the iron filings get arranged in circles up
to a larger distance from the wire,
showing that the magnetic field strength
has increased and it is effective up to a
larger distance.

Note : The magnetic field at any point is the
combined effect of the magnetic field due to
current in the wire and the magnetic field of the
earth*. At points near the wire, the magnetic
field due to current in the wire predominates due
to which iron filings arrange themselves in
circles, while at points far away from the wire,
the magnetic field due to earth becomes more
pronounced as compared to the magnetic field
due to current in the wire, as a result filings tend
to arrange themselves in straight lines. The point
where the two fields are equal and opposite, is
called a neutral point. At the neutral point, the
resultant magnetic field is zero and the compass
needle at this point rests in any direction.

10.3 RULE TO FIND THE DIRECTION OF
MAGNETIC FIELD

Experimentally the direction of magnetic field
at a point is determined with the help of compass
needle. But theoretically the direction of magnetic
field (or magnetic field lines) produced due to
flow of current in a conductor can be determined
by various rules. One such rule is the right hand
thumb rule.

Right hand thumb rule

If we hold the current carrying conductor in
our right hand such that the thumb points in the
direction of flow of current, then the fingers
encircle the wire in the direction of the magnetic
field lines (Fig. 10.3).

* The magnetic field of earth in a limited space in a horizontal plane is
uniform. It is directed from the geographic south to geographic north.

~~) DIRECTION
= OF MAGNETIC
FIELD LINES

DIRECTION OF
t CURRENT

Fig. 10.3 Right hand thumb rule

In Fig. 10.3, the direction of current in the
conductor XY is upwards (i.e., X to Y). The
magnetic field lines are anticlockwise around the
conductor.

10.4 MAGNETIC FIELD DUE TO CURRENT
IN A LOOP (OR CIRCULAR COIL)

The magnetic field lines due to current in a
loop (or circular coil) can be obtained by the
following experiment.

Experiment : Take a piece of thick wire A
bent in the form of a loop (or coil). It is passed
at two points P and Q through a horizontal
cardboard C such that the points P and Q lie in
a plane through the diameter of the coil. Then
sprinkle some iron filings on the cardboard.
Connect a battery through a rheostat and a key
between the ends X and Y of the loop as shown
in Fig. 10.4.

LOQP A MAGNETIC

FIELD LINES

CURRENT i.

BATTERY
Fig. 10.4 Magnetic field due to current in a loop
When current is passed through the coil by
closing the key and the cardboard is gently
tapped, we find that the iron filings get arranged


===== PAGE 4 =====

in a definite pattern representing the magnetic
field lines of the current carrying loop (Fig. 10.4).
To find the direction of magnetic field lines, a
compass needle is used. The direction of magnetic
field at a point is along the needle in direction
in which its north pole points. An arrow is
marked on each magnetic field line to indicate the
direction of magnetic field.

From the pattern of magnetic field lines, it is
noted that

(1) In the vicinity of wire at P and Q, the
magnetic field lines are nearly circular.

(2) Within the space enclosed by the wire (i.e.,

between P and Q), the magnetic field lines

are in the same direction.

(3) Near the centre of loop, the magnetic

field lines are nearly parallel to each other,

so the magnetic field may be assumed to be

nearly uniform in a small space near the

centre.

(4) At the centre, the magnetic field lines

are along the axis of loop and normal to its

plane.

(5) The magnetic field lines become denser (i.e.,

the magnetic field strength is increased) if

(i) the strength of current in loop is increased,
and

(ii) the number of turns in the loop are
increased.

(6) The magnetic field lines pass through the
loop in same direction. They appear to come
out from the face of loop on other side, so
that face behaves as a north pole, while the
magnetic field lines appear to enter in at the
front face of loop, so it behaves as a south
pole. Thus the loop acts like a dipole and it
has a magnetic field similar to that of a
magnetised disc of radius same as that of the
loop.

The polarity at the two faces of loop depends
on the direction of current in the loop. On
reversing the direction of current in loop, the
polarity at the faces of loop gets reversed. The

polarity at the faces of the loop is determined by
the clock rule.

Clock rule (clockwise current-south pole
and se hides piel death Pere)

This can be tested by using a compass needle.
In Fig. 10.5 (a), current at the face of loop is
anticlockwise, so it behaves as north pole, while
in Fig. 10.5(b), current at the face of loop is
clockwise so it behaves as south pole.

2g

acer CURRENT Se he CURRENT

He r Polarities at the hecs i‘ a
loop carrying current

10.5 MAGNETIC FIELD DUE TO A
CURRENT CARYING CYLINDRICAL
COIL (OR SOLENOID)

If a conducting wire is wound in form of a
cylindrical coil whose diameter is less in
comparison to its length, the coil is called a
solenoid. It looks like a helical spring. To obtain
the magnetic field lines due to a current carrying
solenoid, the following experiment is performed.

Experiment : Take a cardboard having two
slits PQ and P’Q’ parallel to each other, at a small
separation and parallel to its length. Wind a
uniform spiral of an insulated thick copper wire
through the two slits such that the axis of spiral
is in the plane of the cardboard. Connect a
battery through a rheostat and a key between the
ends X and Y of the solenoid. Sprinkle some iron
filings on the cardboard and pass current through
the solenoid by closing the key. Gently tap the
cardboard.


===== PAGE 5 =====

SLIT IN
CARD
BOARD

BATTERY RHEOSTAT

Fig. 10.6 Magnetic field lines due to a solenoid
carrying current

It is found that the iron filings on the
cardboard get arranged in a definite pattern as
shown by the dotted lines in Fig. 10.6,
representing the pattern of magnetic field lines
due to the current carrying solenoid. The direction
of magnetic field at a point is determined by
using a compass needle and arrows are marked
on these lines in the direction in which the north
pole of the compass needle points.

From the pattern of magentic field lines, it is
found that

(1) The magnetic field lines inside the solenoid
are nearly straight and parallel to the axis of
solenoid i.e., the magnetic field is uniform
inside the solenoid.

(2) The magnetic field lines become denser (i.e.,
a strong magnetic field is obtained) on
increasing current in the solenoid.
(3) The magnetic field is increased, if the number
of turns in the solenoid of given length is
increased.
(4) The magnetic field is also increased, if a soft
iron rod (core) is placed along the axis of
solenoid. The soft iron increases the
strength of magnetic field of the solenoid
since soft iron has a high magnetic
permeability.

In Fig. 10.6, the end P at which the direction

of current is anticlockwise behaves as a

north pole (N), while the end Q at which

the direction of current is clockwise behaves

(5)

as a south pole (S). On reversing the direction
of current in the solenoid, the polarities at
the ends of solenoid are reversed because the
direction of magnetic field has reversed.

Similarities between a current carrying
solenoid and a bar magnet

(1) The magnetic field lines of a current carrying
solenoid are similar to the magnetic field
lines of a bar magnet*. Thus a current
carrying solenoid behaves just like a bar
magnet.

(2) A current carrying solenoid when suspended

freely sets itself in the north-south direction

exactly in the same manner as a bar magnet
does.

(3) A current carrying solenoid also acquires the

attractive property of a magnet. If iron filings

are brought near the current carrying
solenoid, it attracts them.

Dissimilarities between a current carrying
solenoid and a bar magnet

(1) The strength of magnetic field due to a
solenoid can be changed by changing the
current in it, while the strength of magnetic
field due to a bar magnet cannot be changed.

(2) The direction of magnetic field due to a

solenoid can be reversed by reversing the

direction of current in it, but the direction of
magnetic field due to a bar magnet cannot
be reversed.

10.6 ELECTROMAGNET

An electromagnet is a temporary . ‘strong magnet
made by passing current in a coil wound
around a a of soft iron. It is an artificia .
magnet. — a Pee =4 Be

meee!

An electromagnet can be made in any sheds,
but usually the following two shapes of
electromagnet are in use :

(1) Eshape (or bar) magnet, and
(2) U-shape (or horse-shoe) magnet.
* Refer Vol. I, Chapter X.



===== PAGE 6 =====

(1) Construction of I-shaped (or bar)

electromagnet

To construct an I-shaped electromagnet, a thin
insulated copper wire XY is wound in form of a
solenoid around a straight soft iron bar PQ. A
battery B through an ammeter A, a rheostat Rh
and a key K, is connected between the ends
X and Y of the wire as shown in Fig 10.7.

@

Fig. 10.7 I-shaped electromagnet

When current is passed through the winding -

of solenoid by closing the key K, the end P of
the bar becomes the south pole (S) since current
at this face is clockwise, while the end Q at
which the current is anticlockwise, becomes the
north pole (N). Thus the bar PQ becomes a
magnet. The bar remains magnetised so long the
electric current flows through the solenoid, but it
gets demagnetised as soon as the current is
switched off (since soft iron has a low
retentivity), thus it is a temporary magnet.

Use : A bar shaped electromagnet is commonly
used in relay.*

(2) Construction of U-shaped (or horse-
shoe) electromagnet

To construct a horse-shoe electromagnet, a
thin insulated copper wire XY is spirally wound
on the two arms of a U-shaped soft iron core,
such that the winding as seen from the ends, is
in opposite sense on the two arms. In Fig. 10.8,
winding on the arm P starts from the front and
it is in the clockwise direction (when viewed
from the bottom). On reaching the upper end of
the arm P, winding starts from the back at the top
of the arm Q and it is in anticlockwise direction.
Between the ends X and Y of the wire, a battery

* A relay is a switching device.

through an ammeter, rheostat and a key, is
connected.

Fig. 10.8 Horse-shoe electro-magnet

When current is passed through the winding
by closing the key, the end of the arm P becomes
the south pole S (current at this face is clockwise)
and the end of the arm Q becomes the north
pole N (current at this face is anti-clockwise).
Thus we get a very strong magnetic field in
gap between the two poles. The magnetic field
in gap vanishes as soon as current in the
circuit is switched off. Thus it is a temporary
magnet.

Use : Horse shoe magnets are used in gadgets
like d.c. motor, a.c. generator, electric bell, etc.

Note : For sending current in the coil, the
source must be the d.c. source (i.e., battery).
With an a.c. source of frequency 50 Hz,

although the soft iron core gets magnetised as
long the current is passed, but its polarity at
the ends changes 50 times in each second.

Ways of increasing the magnetic field of an
electromagnet

The magnetic field of an electromagnet
(I or U-shaped) can be increased by the following
two ways :
(1) by increasing the number of turns of winding
in the solenoid, and
by increasing the current through the
solenoid.

(2)


===== PAGE 7 =====

10.7 PERMANENT MAGNET

A permanent magnet is a naturally occuring
magnet. Since it is not strong enough and of
required shape for many purposes, so a strong
permanent magnet is made like an electromagnet
using the piece of steel, instead of soft iron. A
coil of insulated copper wire is wound around the
steel piece and then current is passed in the coil.
Once magnetised, it does not lose its magnetism
easily (since steel has more retentivity than the
soft iron) so it becomes a permanent magnet.

Use : The permanent magnets are used in
electric meters (e.g., galvanometer, ammeter,
voltmeter) and in magnetic compass, etc.

10.8 COMPARISON OF AN ELECTRO
MAGNET WITH A PERMANENT
MAGNET

1. It is made of soft iron.

2. It produces the magnetic
field so long as current
flows in its coil. ie., it
produces the temporary
magnetic field.

3. The magnetic field

strength can be changed.

1, It is made of steel.
2. It produces a permanent
magnetic field.

Ww

. The magnetic field
strength cannot be
changed.

4. The magnetic field of a
permanent magnet is not
so strong.

. The polarity of a

permanent magnet can

not be reversed.

4. The magnetic field of an
electromagnet can be
very strong.

. The polarity of an
electromagnet can be
reversed.

wn
wn

6.It can easily be | 6, It can not be easily
demagnetised by demagnetised.
switching off the current.

10.9 ADVANTAGES OF AN ELECTRO-
MAGNET OVER A PERMANENT
MAGNET

An electromagnet has the following
advantages over a permanent magnet :
(1) An electromagnet can produce a strong
magnetic field.
(2) The strength of the magnetic field of an
electromagnet can easily be changed by

changing the current (or the number of turns)
in its solenoid.
(3) The polarity of the electromagnet can be
reversed by reversing the direction of current

in its solenoid.

10.10 USES OF ELECTROMAGNET

Electromagnets are mainly used for the
following purposes :

(1) For lifting and transporting heavy iron scrap,
girders, plates, etc. particularly when it is not
convenient to take the help of human labour.
Electromagnets are used to lift as much as
20,000 kg of iron in a single lift. To unload
the iron objects at the desired place, the
current in the electromagnet is switched off
so that the electromagnet gets demagnetised
and the iron objects get detached.

(2) For loading the furnaces with iron.

(3) For separating the iron pieces from debris and
ores, where iron exists as impurities (e.g., for
separating iron from the crushed copper ore
in copper mines).

(4) For removing the pieces of iron from
wounds.

(5) In scientific research, to study the magnetic
properties of a substance in a magnetic field.

(6) In several electrical devices such as electric

bell, telegraph, electric tram, electric motor,
relay, microphone, loud speaker, etc.
Use of electromagnet in an electric bell
An electric bell is one of the most commonly
used application of an electromagnet.
Construction and wiring : An electric bell is
shown in Fig. 10.9.
The main parts of the bell are :
(i) a horse-shoe electromagnet M, having a
soft iron core,
a soft iron armature A,
a hammer H,
a gong G
a metallic spring strip SS,

(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)


===== PAGE 8 =====

ADJUSTING
Seneyk ELECTROMAGNET
ARMATURE

METALLIC STRIP

K
SWITCH
Fig. 10.9 Electric bell and its wiring

(vi) an adjusting screw S’,
(vii) a switch (or bell-push) K, and
(viii) a battery.

The armature A is fixed to the spring strip SS.
The hammer H is attached at the upper end of
the armature A. When the switch K is not
pressed, the strip SS makes contact with the
adjusting screw S’ and there is a gap between the
armature A and the poles of the electromagnet.

The coil CC is wound on the two arms of the
electromagnet in the opposite direction as shown
in the diagram. One end of the coil is connected
to the terminal T, through the strip SS and the
screw S’, while the other end is connected to the
terminal T,. A battery is provided in series with
the switch K across the terminals T, and T,,.

Working and function of each part : The
working of an electric bell is based on the

1. Why does a magnetic needle show a deflection
when brought close to a current carrying
conductor ?

A current carrying conductor produces a magnetic
field around it and the magnetic needle in this magnetic
field experiences a torque due to which it deflects to align
itself in the direction of magnetic field.

2. A straight conductor passes vertically through a
cardboard having some iron filings sprinkled on
it.

magnetic effect of current. As the electric circuit
is closed by pressing the switch K, the current
flows through the coil CC and the core of the
electromagnet gets magnetised and therefore it
attracts the armature A as shown by the arrow in
Fig. 10.9. Due to movement of the armature A,
the hammer H strikes the gong G and the bell
rings.

At the moment, when the armature A moves
towards the electromagnet due to magnetic
attraction, the connection between the strip SS
and the screw S’ breaks due to which the flow
of current in the coil stops. Consequently, the
electromagnet gets demagnetised and the
armature A flies back to its original position due
to the spring effect of the strip SS. Now the
armature again touches the screw S’, which
results in the flow of current in the coil. The
electromagnet regains its magnetism and the
armature A is again attracted, so the hammer H
again strikes the gong G. This process continues.

The process of make and break of the circuit
goes on and the hammer strikes the gong
repeatedly so the bell rings as long the switch K
is kept pressed.

Note : If an a.c. source is used in place of
the battery, the core of electromagnet will
get magnetised, but the polarity at its ends
will change. Since attraction of armature

does not depend on the polarity of the
electromagnet, so the bell will still ring on
pressing the switch K.

r= 2
(a) A current is passed in the conductor in
downward direction and the cardboard is
gently tapped. Show the setting of iron filings
on the card board and draw arrows to
represent the direction of magnetic field lines.
(b) What changes occur in the arrangement of
iron filings in part (a) if
(i) the strength of current is increased ?
(ii) the single conductor is replaced by several
parallel conductors each carrying the same

Ss Ge +


===== PAGE 9 =====

(b)

(c)

(a)

current flowing in the same direction ?
Give reason in each case (i) and (ii).
(c) Name the law used by you to find the direction
of magnetic field lines.

Fig. 10.10 shows the pattern in which the
iron filings will set themselves. The arrows show the
direction of the magnetic field lines.

CONDUCTOR

CARDBOARD

Fig. 10.10

(i) The arrangement of iron filings remains
unchanged, but they become denser and get
arranged up to a larger distance from the conductor
when the strength of current is increased. This is
because on increasing the strength of current, the
strength of magnetic field is increased and it is
effective up to a larger distance from the conductor.
(ii) The magnetic field at a point due to each
conductor will be in same direction, so they will be
added up. Thus the magnetic field strength is
increased and it is effective up to a large distance so
the magnetic field lines come closer and iron filings
get arranged up to a larger distance.

Right hand thumb rule.
In Fig. 10.11, A and B represent two straight

wires carrying equal currents in a direction
normal to the plane of paper inwards.

x e x
A K B
Fig. 10.11

(a) Sketch separately the magnetic field lines
produced by each current.

(b) What will be the magnetic field at mid point K
of the line joining A and B. Give reason.

(c) How will the magnetic needle of compass rest
if it is placed at the point K ?

(d) What will be the effect on the magnetic field
at the point K if the current in wire B is
reversed ?

Fig 10.12 shows the sketch of magnetic field lines
produced by the current in wires A and B.

la a

(b)

(c)

(d)

(a)

Magnetic field
due to A

-
eK
Hi

Magnetic field
due to B
Fig. 10.12
The net magnetic field at the point K is zero.
Reason : The point K is equidistant from the wires
A and B, and the wires A and B carry equal currents,
so the magnetic fields at the point K due to current
in the wires A and B are equal in magnitude, but
opposite in direction. Due to current in the wire A,
it is downwards in the plane of paper, while due to
current in the wire B, it is upwards in the plane of
paper. The two fields cancel each other.
The magnetic needle of compass at the point K will
rest in geographic north-south direction due to the
earth’s magnetic field.
On reversing the direction of current in the wire B,
the direction of magnetic field due to current in it is
reversed at the point K’i.e., it becomes downwards
in the plane of paper. Then both the magnetic fields
due to currents in wires A and B at the point K get
added, so the net magnetic field at the point K is
downwards in the plane of paper.

The diagram in Fig. 10.13 shows a current
carrying loop passing through a sheet of stiff
cardboard at the points P and Q.

—p>—>
CURRENT
Fig. 10.13

(a) Draw three magnetic field lines on the
cardboard, one each at points P and Q, and
one at the centre of loop. Draw arrows to
show the direction of magnetic field lines.

(b) State two factors on which the magnitude of
magnetic field at the centre of loop depends.

Fig. 10.14 represents three magnetic field lines due
to the current carrying loop. Two magnetic field
lines are shown, one each at points P and Q where
the loop passes through the card board, and one
magnetic field line is shown at the centre of loop. At
P, current is upwards, so magnetic field line is


===== PAGE 10 =====

(b)

$s.

LOOP

CARDBOARD

Ss
CURRENT
Fig. 10.14

anticlockwise. At Q, current is downwards, so
magnetic field line is clockwise. Since current in
loop is clockwise, magnetic field line at the centre
is along the axis of loop inwards.

The magnitude of the magnetic field at the centre of
loop depends on (i) the strength of current in the
loop, and (ii) the radius of loop.

Draw a labelled diagram to make an
electromagnet from a soft iron bar AB. Mark the
polarity at its ends A and B. State one precaution
which you will observe.

The labelled diagram is shown in Fig. 10.15. The
polarity at the end A where the current is clockwise,
is south (S), while at the end B where the current
is anticlockwise, is north (N).

BATTERY
ie RHEOSTAT| SOFT IRON BAR

Fig. 10.15

Precaution ; The source of current must be the d.c.
source.

By using a compass needle describe how can you
demonstrate that there is a magnetic field around a
current carrying conductor.

Draw a diagram showing the direction of three
magnetic field lines due to a straight wire carrying
a current. Also show the direction of current in the
wire.

How is the magnetic field due to a straight
current carrying wire affected if current in the wire
is (a) decreased, (b) reversed ?

State a law which determines the direction of
magnetic field around a current carrying wire.

A straight wire lying in a horizontal plane carries a

|

6. (a) Draw a diagram representing the magnetic

field lines inside and outside a solenoid
through which a current is flowing and mark
the direction of current in the solenoid and the
direction of magnetic field lines. Also mark
the polarity at the faces of solenoid.

(b) A bar of soft iron is placed inside the solenoid
parallel to its length in part (a). Describe what
happens.

(a) Fig. 10.16 shows the magnetic field lines inside and

outside, due to a current carrying solenoid. The
direction of current in the solenoid at the face A is
clockwise, so it will have the south polarity (S) and
the face B of solenoid at which the current is

Fig. 10.16

anticlockwise will have the north polarity (N).
Inside the solenoid, the magnetic field lines are
closer, while they become farther outside the
solenoid.

If a bar of soft iron is placed inside the solenoid
parallel to its length, the magnetic field lines inside
the solenoid become still closer i.e., the magnetic
field inside the solenoid is increased.

current from north to south. (a) What will be the
direction of magnetic field at a point just underneath
it ? (b) Name the law used to arrive at the answer in
part (a).

Ans. (a) towards east (b) right hand thumb rule

. What will happen to a compass needle when the

compass is placed below a wire with needle
parallel to it and a current is made to flow through
the wire ? Give a reason to justify your answer.
Draw a labelled diagram showing three magnetic
field lines of a loop carrying current. Mark the
direction of current and the direction of magnetic
field by arrows in your diagram.


===== PAGE 11 =====

8.

10.

11.

12.

A wire, bent into a circle, carries a current in an
anticlockwise direction. What polarity does this face
of the coil exhibit ? Ans. north
What is the direction of magnetic field at the
centre of a coil carrying current in (i) the clockwise,
(ii) the anticlockwise direction ?
Ans. (i) along the axis of cail inwards
(ii) along the axis of coil outwards.
Draw a diagram to represent the magnetic field lines
along the axis of a current carrying solenoid. Mark
arrows to show the direction of current in the
solenoid and the direction of magnetic field lines.
Name and state the rule by which the polarity at the
ends of a current carrying solenoid is determined.
The diagram in Fig. 10.17 shows a small magnet
placed near a solenoid AB with its north pole N near
the end A. Current is switched on in the solenoid by
pressing the key K.
MAGNET

SOLENOID

ts
Fig. 10.17

(a) State the polarity at the ends A and B. (b) Will

the magnet be attracted or repelled ? Give a reason

for your answer.

Ans. (a) A —north pole, B—south pole

13.

(b) repelled because the end A of the solenoid
becomes the north pole as current at this face is anti-
clockwise and it repels the north pole of the magnet.

The diagram in Fig. 10.18 shows a spiral coil wound
on a hollow cardboard tube AB. A magnetic compass
is placed close to it. Current is switched on by
closing the key. (a) What will be the polarity at the
ends A and B ? (b) How will the compass needle be
affected ? Give reason.

COMPASS a COIL
As 10.18

Ans. (a) A—north pole, B—south pole (b) the north
pole of compass needle will deflect towards west.
Reason : End A of the coil behaves like north

pole which repels the north pole of the

compass needle towards west.

14.

IS:

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

State two ways by which the magnetic field due to
a current carrying solenoid can be made stronger.
Why does a current carrying freely suspended
solenoid rest along a particular direction ? State the
direction in which it rests.

Ans. a current carrying solenoid behaves like a bar
magnet. It rest in geographic north-south direction.

What effect will there be on a .magnetic compass
when it is brought near a current carrying
solenoid ?
Ans. the needle of the compass will rest in the
direction of magnetic field due to the solenoid at that
point.
How is the magnetic field due to a solenoid carrying
current affected if a soft iron bar is introduced inside
the solenoid ?

Ans. the strength of magnetic field increases

Complete the following sentences :
(a) When current flows in a wire, it creates
(b) On reversing the direction of current in a wire,
the magnetic field produced by it gets .............
(c) A current carrying solenoid behaves like a........

(d) A current carrying solenoid when freely
suspended, it always rests in

direction.
Ans. (a) a magnetic field around it (b) reversed
(c) bar magnet (d) north-south
You are required to make an electromagnet from a
soft iron bar by using a cell, an insulated coil of
copper wire and a switch. (a) Draw a circuit diagram
to represent the process. (b) Label the poles of the
electromagnet.

The diagram in Fig. 10.19 shows a coil wound
around a soft iron bar XY. (a) State the polarity at
the ends X and Y as the switch is pressed.
(b) Suggest one way of increasing the strength of

electromagnet so formed.
COIL

RHEOSTAT

SWITCH

BATTERY
Fig. 10.19

Ans. (a) X-north pole, Y-south pole.
(b) by reducing the resistance of circuit by means
of rheostat to increase current in the coil.


===== PAGE 12 =====

21. (a) What name is given to a cylindrical coil of
diameter less than its length ?

(b) Ifa piece of soft iron is placed inside the coil
mentioned in part (a) and current is passed in
the coil from a battery, what name is then given
to the device so obtained ?

Give one use of the device mentioned in
part (b).
Ans. (a) solenoid, (b) electromagnet, (c) electric relay.

(c)

22. Show with the aid of a diagram how a wire is
wound on a U-shaped piece of soft iron in order to
make it an electromagnet. Complete the circuit
diagram and label the poles of the electromagnet.
What is an electromagnet ? Name two factors on
which the strength of magnetic field of an electro-
magnet depends and state how does it depend on
the factors stated by you.

Fig. 10.20 shows the current flowing in the coil of
wire wound around the soft iron horse shoe core.
State the polarities developed at the ends A and B.

Fig. 10.20

Ans. at A—south and at B—north

State two ways by which the strength of an
electromagnet can be increased.

25.

26. Name one device that uses an electromagnet.

Ans. electric bell.

27. State two advantages of an electromagnet over a

permanent magnet.

28. State two differences between an electromagnet

and a permanent magnet.

29. Why is soft iron used as the core of the

electromagnet in an electric bell ?

How is the working of an electric bell affected, if
alternating current be used instead of direct
current ?

31. The incomplete diagram of an electric bell is given
in Fig 10.21. Draw winding of coil on the core and

complete the electric circuit in the diagram

40)

G-Gong

H-Hammer

A-—Armature A c

C-Core

B-Battery of 1,8,
Fig. 10.21

32. Name the material used for making the armature of
an electric bell. Give a reason for your answer.

MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE

1. The presence of magnetic field at a point can be
detected by means of :
(a) a strong magnet
(c) a compass needle:

(b) a solenoid
(d) a current carrying wire.
Ans. (c) a compass needle.
2. On reversing the direction of current in a wire, the
magnetic field produced by it :
(a) gets reversed in direction
(b) increases in strength
(c) decreases in strength
(d) remains unchanged in strength and direction.
Ans. (a) gets reversed in direction.

10.11 FORCE ON A CURRENT CARRYING
CONDUCTOR IN A MAGNETIC FIELD

Lorentz found that a charge moving in a
magnetic field, in a direction other than the
direction of magnetic field, experiences a force.
It is called the Lorentz force. Since charge in
motion constitutes a current, therefore a conductor
carrying moving charges (or current) placed in a

=

r=

magnetic field, in direction other than the
direction of magnetic field, will also experience
a force and can produce motion in the conductor.
This can be demonstrated by the following
experiment.

Experiment : Fig. 10.22(a) shows a thick
copper wire AC suspended at its ends A and C
from a support by means of threads. A magnetic

ae >

Vas es


===== PAGE 13 =====

field B is applied by keeping the wire AC in
between the poles N and S of a horse shoe
magnet, with length AC of wire normal to the
magnetic field lines of the magnet. Between the
ends A and C of the wire, a rheostat, key
and battery are connected. In Fig. 10.22, the
magnetic field B is in the plane of paper in
upward direction (i.e., in Y direction) and the
wire also lies in the plane of paper with its length
AC in X direction.

22S >
I, B and F are mutually per-
pendicular to each other.

(b) Direction of I, B and F
Fig. 10.22 Force on a current carrying conductor

Rheostat

(a) Experimental set up

Experimentally, it is observed that

(1) When no current flows in the wire, no force
acts on the wire and the wire does not move.

(2) When current J is passed in the wire in
direction from A to C (i.e., in X direction), a
force F acts on the wire in a direction
perpendicular to both the direction of
current J and the direction of magnetic
field B, as shown in Fig. 10.22 (b). Due to
the force F, the conductor begins to move
normal to the plane of paper in outward

direction (i.e., in Z direction).

(3) If the direction of current through the wire
is reversed by interchanging the terminals of
the battery, the direction of force (i.e., the
direction of movement of the wire) is also
reversed i.e., now it moves normal to the
plane of paper in inward direction (or in

— Z direction).

(4) On reversing the direction of magnetic
field (i.e., on reversing the polarities N and
S of the horse shoe magnet), the direction

of force (i.e., the direction of movement

of wire) is reversed i.e., now it moves in
— Z direction.

Note : If wire is short enough and is
placed between the poles of magnet with its
length AC in Y direction such that the current

in it is in the direction parallel to the direction
of magnetic field, no force acts on the wire
and it does not move.

Magnitude of force : Experimentally it is
found that the magnitude of force acting on a
current carrying wire placed in a magnetic field
in the direction perpendicular to its length,
depends on the following three factors :

(a) The force F is directly proportional to
the current J flowing in the wire, i.e.,

FJ (i)
(b) The force F is directly proportional to the
strength of magnetic field B, i.e.,
. FoB (di)
(c) The force F is directly proportional to the length /
of the wire (within the magnetic field), i.e.,

Fx] w+e(iii)
Combining the eqns. (i), (ii) and (iii),

F cc JBI
or F = KIBI

where K is a constant whose value depends on
the choice of the unit. In S.I. units, the unit of
B is such that K = 1. Then

.-(10.1)

Unit of magnetic field : From eqn. (10.1),

F
Bers
newton
ampere X metre
tesla (symbol T) or weber/metre? (symbol Wb m~~).

so the S.I. unit of magnetic field is

or N A7 m1. It is also named as

Fleming’s left hand rule for the direction of
force

The direction of force on a current carrying
conductor placed in a magnetic field is obtained
by the Fleming's left hand rule.

a ea]


===== PAGE 14 =====

Central finger—Current t MOTION (FORCE)

Fore finger—Field

Thumb—Motion MAGNETIC
; ; FIELD

Fig. 10.23 Fleming’s left hand rule

10.12 SIMPLE D.C. MOTOR

We know that in electric gadgets such as fan,
washing machine, juicer, mixer, grinder, etc., an
electric motor is used to produce rotational
motion by the use of electricity. Thus

Principle : A d.c. motor works on the
principle that when an electric current is passed
through a conductor placed normally in a
magnetic field, a force acts on the conductor as
a result of which the conductor begins to move
and thus mechanical energy (or work) is obtained.
The direction of force on the conductor is
obtained with the help of Fleming’s left hand rule.

Construction and its main parts : The basic
construction of an electric motor is shown in
Fig. 10.24. The main parts of an electric motor
are :

me)

CURRENT

the armature coil ABCD mounted on an
axle,

(2) the split parts S, and S, of a ring (i.e, a
copper slip ring being divided in two
parts S, and S,) which is known as split ring
commutator,

(3) a pair of carbon (or copper) brushes B, and B,,

Axle _, Armature coil

s Horse shoe
electromagnet

Split ring commutator

Soft iron core

Horse shoe
electromagnet

5
Key Battery

Rheostat

Fig. 10.24 A d.c. motor

(4) a horse-shoe electromagnet NS, and
(5) a d.c. source (i.e., battery).

The armature coil ABCD is wound around a
soft iron core and it is placed in between the pole
pieces of a strong horse-shoe electromagnet NS.
The coil is free to rotate about its axis. The ends
A and D of the coil are connected respectively
to the split parts S, and S, of a ring. The brush
B, presses gently against the split ring S, and the
brush B, presses gently against the split ring S,.
A d.c. source (i.e., battery) is connected across the
brushes B, and B, through a key and rheostat.
When the coil rotates, the split parts of ring
rotate with it, while the brushes which are fixed,
remain at their position so as to remain in
contact with the split ring.

A wheel can be mounted on the axle attached
to the armature coil along its axis so as to rotate
the desired part of the machine where the motor
is used.

Working : In Fig. 10.25 (a), the plane of the
coil is horizontal and the split ring S, touches the
brush B,, while the split ring S, touches the brush
B,. The brush B, is connected to the + ve
terminal of d.c. battery, while the brush B, is
connected to its — ve terminal. When key is
closed, the current flows in the coil in direction
ABCD. The current in arms BC and DA is
parallel to the magnetic field, so these arms
experience no force. The current in arms AB and
CD is perpendicular to the magnetic field, so each


===== PAGE 15 =====

arm experiences a force F (= JBI). Here J is the
current in the coil, B is the magnetic field
strength and / is the length AB or CD. According
to Fleming’s left hand rule, the force F on the
arm AB is in inward direction perpendicular to
the plane of paper and the force F on the arm
CD is in outward direction perpendicular to the
plane of paper. The forces on the arms AB
and CD being equal and opposite, form an
anti-clockwise couple due to which the coil
begins to rotate such that the arm AB goes in and
the arm CD comes out.

(b) After 90° rotation, coil normal

(a) Initial position, coil in
to the plane of magnetic field.

plane of magnetic field

(d) After 270° rotation, coil normal
to the plane of magnetic field.

(c) After 180° rotation, coil
in plane of magnetic field

Fig. 10.25 Working of a d.c. motor

When the coil reaches the vertical position
after 90° rotation (i.e., perpendicular to the plane
of paper with the arm CD out and the arm AB
in) as shown in Fig. 10.25 (b), momentarily there
is no contact between the brush B, and split ring

in a ral

S, or between the brush B, and split ring S,. So
at this moment, no current flows through the coil
and thus no force acts on the coil. Due to the
inertia of rotational motion, the coil does not stop
in this position, but it continues to rotate.

As the coil passes from its vertical position,
the split ring S, comes in contact with the
brush B, , while the split ring S$, comes in contact
with the brush B, [Fig. 10.25 (c)]. Now the
current flows through the coil in direction DCBA.
The arms CB and AD being parallel to the
magnetic field, experience no force. On the arm
DC, a force acts in inward direction perpendicular
to the plane of paper and on the arm BA, an
equal force acts in outward direction
perpendicular to the plane of paper. The force is
maximum (i.e. F = JBI) when the coil turns by
180° from the initial position. The forces acting
on the arms DC and BA of the coil again form
an anticlockwise couple due to which the coil
remains rotating in the same direction.

After rotation by 270°, the coil reaches to the
vertical position as shown in Fig. 10.25(d). Again
for a moment, there is no contact between the brush
B, and split ring S, or between the brush B, and
split ring S,, hence no current flows in the coil. But
due to inertia of motion, the coil continues to rotate
and again it reaches back to its initial position.

Note : (1) The deflecting couple on the coil
of the motor is maximum when the plane of
coil is parallel to the direction of magnetic
field, while the deflecting couple is zero (or
minimum) when the plane of the coil is
perpendicular to the magnetic field.

(2) The speed of rotation of coil, obviously,
depends on the magnitude of deflecting couple

formed by the forces acting on the arms AB
and CD of the coil. Deflecting couple is BAnI
where B = strength of magnetic field, A = area

of coil, n = number of turns in coil, and
I = current in coil. Hence the speed of rotation
of coil is directly proportional to these factors.



===== PAGE 16 =====

Ways of increasing the speed of rotation of
coil

The speed of rotation of coil can be increased
by the following four ways :
(1) by increasing the strength of current in the
coil, f
by increasing the number of turns in the coil,
by increasing the area of the coil, and
by increasing the strength of magnetic field.
To increase the strength of magnetic field, a
soft iron core is inserted within the coil. The
insertion of core makes the magnetic field strong
and radial. Due to radial field, the couple acting
on the coil remains almost constant during the

(2)
(3)
(4)

1. A rectangular coil ABCD having a battery
connected between its ends A and D is placed in
between the pole pieces of a horseshoe magnet as
shown in Fig. 10.26.

Fig. 10.26

(i) What is the direction of current in the coil ?
(ii) What is the direction of force on each arm ?
(iii) What is the effect of the forces on coil ?

(iv) How is the effect of forces on coil changed if
the connections at the terminals of battery are
interchanged ?

(i) In Fig. 10.26, the current in coil is in direction
DCBA.

(ii) By Fleming’s left hand rule, on the arm AB, the
force is outwards normal to the plane of coil. On
the arm BC, no force acts. On the arm CD, the
force is inwards perpendicular to the plane of
coil. On the arm DA, no force acts.

(iii) The forces on the arms AB and CD are equal in
magnitude, but opposite in direction. They form

rotation of coil, except in the vertical position of
coil when the couple is zero.

Function of split ring commutator :
Whenever the coil passes from the vertical
position, the direction of current through the coil
has to be reversed, so that the coil continues to
rotate in the same direction. This is achieved by
the two split parts S, and S, of a conducting ring
which reverses the direction of current in the coil.
They are called the split ring commutator.

Transformation of energy in a d.c. motor :
In a d.c. motor, the electrical energy supplied by
the battery to the coil is transferred to the
mechanical energy which rotates the coil.

a clockwise couple. So the coil rotates clockwise
with the arm AB.coming out and the arm CD
going in.
On interchanging the connections at the terminals
of battery, the direction of current in the coil is
reversed, so the forces on the arms AB and CD
of the coil also get reversed and the coil rotates
2. Fig. 10.27 shows a rectangular coil ABCD placed
in between the pole pieces of a horse-shoe magnet
with its plane perpendicular to the magnetic field.
A battery is connected between the ends A and D
of the coil.

(iv)

B
ie}
!
N ! s
'
1
A 1
D
Fig. 10.27

(i) What is the direction of current in the coil ?

(ii) What is the direction of force on each arm of
the coil ?

(iii) Will the coil rotate due to the forces on its
arms ?


===== PAGE 17 =====

(i) In Fig. 10.27, the current in coil is in direction
DCBA.

On the arm AB, the force is outwards in the plane
of coil i.e., away from the arm CD. On the arm BC,
the force is outwards in the plane of coil i.e., away
from the arm AD. On the arm CD, the force is
outwards in the plane of coil i.e., away from the
arm AB. On arm DA, the force is outwards in the
plane of coil i.e., away from the arm BC.

The coil will not rotate (because all the arms
experience an outward pull) and no couple is
formed.

3. State the function of split ring in a d.c. motor.

The split ring act as a commutator in a d.c. motor.
With the split ring, the direction of current through the
coil is reversed after each half rotation of coil and thus
the direction of couple rotating the coil remains
unchanged and the coil continues to rotate in the same
direction.

4. Ad.c. motor is rotating in a clockwise direction.
How can its direction of rotation be reversed ?

(ii)

(iii)

1. Name three factors on which the magnitude of force
on a current carrying conductor placed in a magnetic
field depends and state how does the force depend
on the factors stated by you.

Ans. (i) on strength of magnetic field B (F « B)
(ii) on current J in the conductor (F J) and
(iii) on length / of conductor (F « J)

State condition in each case for the magnitude of

force on a current carrying conductor placed in a

magnetic field to be (a) zero, and (b) maximum.

Ans. (a) when current in conductor is in the direction of
magnetic field.

(b) when current in conductor is normal to the
magnetic field.

3. How will the direction of force be changed, if the current
is reversed in the conductor placed in a magnetic
field ? Ans. direction of force is reversed.

4. Name and state the law which is used to determine
the direction of force on a current carrying
conductor placed in a magnetic field.

5. State Fleming’s left hand rule.

6. State the unit of magnetic field in terms of the force

experienced by a current carrying conductor placed
in a magnetic field.
Ans. newton / ampere x metre (or N A7! m"!)

a

The direction of rotation of motor can be reversed by
reversing the direction of current in the coil i.e., by
interchanging the connections at the terminals of the
battery joined to the brushes of the motor.

5.

State with reason in a d.c. motor, the effect of
(i) inserting a soft iron core within the coil,
(ii) increasing the area of the coil, and
(iii) increasing the strength of current in the coil.

On inserting a soft iron core within the coil of a d.c.
motor, the speed of rotation of coil increases. The
reason is that on inserting the soft iron core in the
coil, the strength of magnetic field between the pole
pieces of magnet increases due to which the
deflecting couple on the coil increases.

(i)

On increasing the area of coil, the deflecting couple
on the coil increases, so the speed of rotation of
coil increases.

(ii)

(iii) By increasing the strength of current in the coil, the
deflecting couple on the coil increases, so the speed
of rotation of the coil increases.

A flat coil ABCD is freely suspended between the
poles of a U-shaped permanent magnet with the
plane of coil parallel to the magnetic field.

(a) What happens when a current is passed in the coil ?

(b) When will the coil come to rest ?

(c) When will the couple acting on the coil be
(i) maximum, and (ii) minimum ?

(d) Name an instrument which makes use of the
principle stated above.

Ans. (a) the coil experiences a torque due to which it rotates.

(b) the coil will come to rest when its plane
becomes normal to the magnetic field.

(c) (i) when the plane of coil is parallel to the
magnetic field, (ii) when the plane of coil is
normal to the magnetic field.

(d) d.c. motor.

A coil ABCD mounted on an axle is placed between

the poles N and S of a permanent magnet as shown
in Fig. 10.28.



===== PAGE 18 =====

(a) In which direction will the coil begin to rotate
when current is passed through the coil in
direction ABCD by connecting a battery
between the ends A and D of the coil ?

(b) Why is a commutator necessary for the
continuous rotation of coil ?

(c) Complete the diagram with commutator, etc.
for the flow of current in the coil.

Ans. (a) anticolckwise (b) after half rotation, the arms AB
and CD get interchanged, so the direction of
torque on coil reverses. To keep the coil rotating
in the same direction, a commutator is needed
to reverse the direction of current in the coil
after each half rotation of coil.

9, What is an electric motor ? State its principle.

10. Draw a labelled diagram of a d.c. motor showing its
main parts.

What energy conversion does take place during the
working of a d.c. motor ?

State two ways by which the speed of rotation of an
electric motor can be increased.

Name two appliances in which an electric motor is
used.

il.

12.

13.

MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE
1. In an electric motor, the energy transformation is :
(a) from electrical to chemical
(b) from chemical to light
(c) from mechanical to electrical

(d) from electrical to mechanical.
Ans. (d) from electrical to mechanical.

10.13 ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION

We have read that when an electric current is
passed through a conductor, a magnetic field is
produced around the conductor. Faraday thought
since a magnetic field is produced by an electric
current, it should be possible to produce an
electric current by the magnetic field. He
performed a number of experiments and observed
that whenever there is a change in the number of
magnetic field lines linked with a conductor*, an
electromotive force (e.mf.) is developed between
the ends of the conductor which lasts as long
as there is a change in the number of magnetic
field lines. This phenomenon is called the
electromagnetic induction.

Demonstration of the phenomenon of
electromagnetic induction

Experiment : Wind an insulated copper wire
in form of a spiral on a paper (or wooden)
cylinder so as to form a coil in the form of a
solenoid. Connect a centre zero galvanometer G
between the two ends of the solenoid. Then place

* The number of magnetic field lines linked with a conductor
is called the magnetic flux linked with it.

PAPER (OR WOODEN) .
CYLINDER
"s)

STATIONARY
TT

N Ss

s TTR) ——3
i. ae

@
WT) 2°
(c) B | gs A

NCU///// 8 ~~}
"L_@et

NULL US -¥s
o *t ost

Fig. 10.29 Demonstration of electromagnetic induction
a magnet NS at some distance, along the axis of
solenoid as shown in Fig. 10.29.

Observations : It is observed that

(1) When the magnet is stationary (v = 0), there
is no deflection in galvanometer and its
pointer reads zero [Fig. 10.29 (a)].


===== PAGE 19 =====

(2) When the magnet with its north pole facing
the solenoid is moved towards it, the
galvanometer shows a deflection towards
right showing that a current flows in
solenoid in the direction B to A as shown in

Fig. 10.29 (b).

As the motion of magnet is stopped, the
pointer of galvanometer comes to zero
position [Fig. 10.29 (c)]. This shows that the
current in solenoid flows as long as the
magnet remains moving.

(3)

(4) If the magnet is moved away from the
solenoid, the pointer of galvanometer deflects
towards left [Fig. 10.29 (d)] showing that the
current in solenoid flows again, but now in
direction A to B which is opposite to that

shown in Fig. 10.29 (b).

If the magnet is moved away rapidly, the
deflection in the galvanometer increases
although the direction of deflection
remains same. It shows that now more current
flows.

(5)

(6) If the magnet is brought towards the solenoid
by keeping its south pole towards it, the
pointer of galvanometer deflects towards
left [Fig. 10.29 (e)] showing that the
current in solenoid flows in direction A to
B which is opposite to that shown in
Fig. 10.29 (b).

Exactly similar observations are made in
galvanometer if magnet is kept stationary and the
solenoid is moved. It implies that it is the relative
motion between the solenoid and magnet which
produces a current, irrespecitive of whether the
magnet moves or the solenoid moves.

Conclusions : From the above observations
Faraday made the following three conclusions :

(1) A current flows in the coil only when there
is a relative motion between the coil and
magnet.

(2) The direction of current is reversed if the

direction of motion (or polarity of the

magnet) is reversed.

(3) The current in the coil is increased
(i) by the rapid motion of magnet (or coil),
(ii) by the use of a strong magnet, and

(iii) by increasing the area of cross section
of coil and by increasing the number
of turns in the coil.

Faraday’s explanation

When there is no relative motion between the
magnet and coil, total number of magnetic field
lines of the magnet passing through the coil (i.e.,
the magnetic flux linked with the coil) remains
constant, therefore no e.m.f. is induced in the coil
and no current flows in it.

When there is a relative motion between the
coil and magnet, magnetic flux linked with the
coil changes. For example in Fig. 10.30, the coil
is moved towards the north pole of magnet, so
the magnetic flux through the coil increases.
similarly if the coil:is moved away from the north
pole of magnet, the magnetic flux through the coil
decreases. Due to change in the magnetic flux

ee
G
(a)

<—— MOTION OF COIL

Fig. 10.30 Change of magnetic flux
through a coil

linked with the coil, an e.mf. is induced in the
coil. The induced e.m.f. causes a current to flow
in the coil if the circuit of coil is closed. Thus,

In electromagnetic induction, the mechanical
energy spent (i.e., the work done) in moving the
coil or the magnet, to change the magnetic flux

="


===== PAGE 20 =====

is transformed into the electrical energy in the
form of current in the coil.

10.14 FARADAY’S LAWS OF ELECTRO-
MAGNETIC INDUCTION

On the basis of the above experimental
observations, Faraday formulated the following
two laws of electromagnetic induction :

(1) Whenever there is a change in magnetic
flux linked with a coil, an emf. is induced.
The e.m.f. induced lasts so long there is a
change in magnetic flux linked with the coil.

The magnitude of e.mf. induced is directly
proportional to the rate of change of
magnetic flux linked with the coil. If magnetic
flux changes at a constant rate, a steady e.m.f.
is produced.

If the circuit of coil is closed, a current flows
in it due to the e.m.f. induced across its ends.

Factors affecting the magnitude of induced
e.m.f.

The magnitude of e.m.f. induced in a coil is
equal to the product of rate of change of magnetic
flux linked with each turn of the coil and the
number of turns in the coil. ie.,

(2)

...(10.2)
Thus, for a given coil and magnet, it depends
on the following two factors :
(1) on the rate of change of magnetic flux with
each turn, and
(2) on the number of turns in the coil.

Direction of induced e.m.f.

The direction of induced e.m.f. (and hence the
direction of induced current) depends on whether
there is an increase or decrease in magnetic
flux. It can be obtained by any of the following
two rules : (1) Fleming’s right hand rule, and
(2) Lenz’s law.

eS

MOTION OF CONDUCTOR

t Fore finger—Field
Central finger—Induced
current

Thumb—Motion
MAGNETIC FIELD
<——_
INDUCED soon
CURRENT

Fig. 10.31 Fleming’s right hand rule

te =

In Fig. 10.29 (b), when north pole of the
magnet is brought towards the end A of solenoid,
the induced current flows in solenoid in direction
B to A i.e., at the end A, the current is
anticlockwise, so the end A of solenoid becomes
a north pole to repel the magnet. Thus it opposes
the motion of north pole of magnet towards the
solenoid which is the cause of producing it.

Similarly, in Fig. 10.29 (d), when north pole
of magnet recedes from end A of the solenoid, the
direction of induced current in the solenoid is
from B to A i.e., it is clockwise at the end A,
and it becomes the south pole so as to oppose the
motion of north pole of the magnet away from
the solenoid which is the cause of producing it.

Lenz’s law is based on the law of
conservation of energy. It shows that the
mechanical energy spent in doing work against
the opposing force experienced by the moving
magnet, is transformed into the electrical energy
due to which current flows in the solenoid.


===== PAGE 21 =====

10.15 A.C. GENERATOR

We know the use of an a.c. generator in our
house (or factory) as an alternative source of
electricity when electric supply from mains is not
available.

Principle : In a generator, a coil is rotated in
a magnetic field. Due to rotation, the magnetic
flux linked with the coil changes and therefore an
e.m.f. is induced between the ends of the coil.
Thus a generator acts as a source of current in
an external circuit containing load when it is
joined between the ends of its coil.

Construction and its main parts : The basic
construction of an a.c. generator is shown in
Fig. 10.32.

Load
Fig. 10.32 A.C. generator

The main parts of an a.c. generator are :
(1) A horse shoe electromagnet NS,
(2) the armature coil ABCD,
(3) the slip rings S,, S,, and
(4) the brushes B,, B,.
(1) A horse shoe electromagnet NS : It is a
strong magnet with poles N and S.

(2) Armature coil ABCD : There is a soft iron
core on which a coil ABCD having a large

number of turns of insulated copper wire is
wound. The coil is rotated rapidly in the
magnetic field between the poles of the field
magnet, by an axle fixed to it.

Slip rings S, and S, : There are two coaxial
metallic rings S, and S, which rotate along
with the coil. One end of the coil is
connected to the slip ring S, and the other
end of the coil is connected to the slip ring
S,. Each ring slips against a brush which is
stationary

Brushes B, and B, : There are two brushes
B, and B, made of carbon, which press
gently against the slip rings S, and S,
respectively. The other ends of brushes act
as terminals of the generator across which
the external circuit containing load is
connected. The brushes B, and B, do not
rotate along with the coil and the slip rings.

Working : The working of an a.c. generator
is shown in Fig. 10.33. Let the magnetic field be
in the plane of paper from north pole N to the
south pole S. Initially let the plane of coil be
perpendicular to the magnetic field (i.e., 6 = 0°)
so maximum magnetic field lines pass through the
coil. In this position, the arm AB of coil is
below the plane of paper, while the arm CD of
coil is above the plane of paper as shown in
Fig. 10.33(a). The end A of coil is connected to
the slip ring S, and the end D to the slip ring
S,. The brush B, touches the slip ring S, and the
brush B, touches the slip ring S,. No e.m.f. is
induced in the coil when it is at rest.

(3)

(4)

Let the coil be rotated clockwise by the
handle attached to the axle. As the coil starts
rotating, the magnetic flux through the coil
decreases and therefore an e.m.f. is induced
between the ends of coil due to which an induced
current flows in the coil. By Fleming’s right hand
tule, the direction of induced current in coil is
along ABCD. This is because when the coil
rotates clockwise, the arm AB moves upwards
(i.e., from below to the plane of paper) so the
induced current in the arm AB is from


===== PAGE 22 =====

(a) Plane of coil normal to (b) Plane of coil parallel to
magnetic field (initial position) magnetic field (after 90° rotation)

(c) Plane of coil normal to
magnetic field
(after 180° rotation)

Fig. 10.33 Working of a.c. generator

(d) Plane of coil parallel to
magnetic field
(after 270° rotation)

A to B, while in the arm CD which moves
inwards (or from above into the plane of paper),
the induced current is from C to D. Therefore in
the external circuit, the current flows from the
brush B, to the brush B, through the load. When
the coil gets rotated by 90° (i.e., the plane of coil
becomes parallel to the magnetic field or
@ = 90°) as shown in Fig. 10.33(b), no magnetic
field line passes through the coil, so the magnetic
flux linked with coil becomes zero. At this
instant, the e.m.f. induced in coil is maximum
because the rate of change of magnetic flux is
maximum at this instant.

On rotation of coil by 180°, the plane of coil
again becomes normal to the magnetic field as
shown in Fig. 10.33(c). Now the magnetic field
lines passing through the coil becomes maximum.
At this position of coil, the rate of change of
magnetic flux is zero, therefore no e.m.f. is
induced in the coil.

When the coil gets rotated further, the
magnetic flux linked with the coil decreases and
the e.m.f. again increases to the same maximum
value, but in opposite direction. When the coil
gets turned by 270° from its initial position as
shown in Fig. 10.33(d), the e.m.f. induced in the
coil is maximum because the rate of change of
magnetic flux is again maximum at this
instant. Now the arms of coil AB and CD have
interchanged their position. As a result, an
induced current flows in the coil in direction
DCBA (i.e. in the external circuit from the brush
B, to the brush B,).

On further rotation of the coil, the induced
e.m.f. reduces to zero and the magnetic flux
linked with coil becomes maximum when the
plane of coil gets rotated by 360° and becomes
normal to the magnetic field as shown in
Fig. 10.33(a).

Thus as the coil rotates in the magnetic field
between the poles of field magnet, an induced e.m.f.
is produced between the ends of the coil. The
e.m.f. so produced between the ends of the coil
changes its polarity as well as magnitude in each
rotation of the coil, so it is called an alternating
e.m.f. Due to this induced e.m.f., an alternating
current flows in the external circuit connected
between the brushes B, and B,. The direction of
current reverses after each half rotation of the coil.

Fig. 10.34 represents the variation in e.m.f.
induced between the ends of coil with angle 0
which the normal to the plane of coil makes with
the magnetic field.

a lar

af
N]| °F [-
Picls: ae wi

Direction of magnetic field ——>
Fig. 10.34 Generation of e.mf. in the coil

‘ah


===== PAGE 23 =====

Note : (1) The magnitude of induced e.mf.
becomes maximum when the magnetic flux linked
with coil reduces to zero from its maximum
value. This happens when the plane of coil lies
in direction of the magnetic field.

(2) The induced e.m.f. becomes zero when the
magnetic flux linked with coil is maximum. This
happens when the plane of coil is normal to the
magnetic field.

Frequency of alternating current

In one complete rotation of coil, we get one
cycle of alternating current in the external circuit.
Thus the alternating current has the frequency
equal to the frequency of rotation of coil.

If the coil makes n rotations per second, the
magnitude of induced e.m.f. at any instant ¢ is

given as
and the current is expressed as

where e, and i, represent the maximum values of
e.m.f. and current respectively*. The alternating
current is abbraviated as a.c.

Note : (1) By increasing the speed of rotation
of coil, the frequency of a.c. generated will also
increase, along with the increase in the
maximum value é, of the induced e.m.f.

(2) The magnitude of alternating current changes
continuously with time in a periodic manner.

* e, = 2nnBAN where B = strength of magnetic field, A = area of cross
section of coil, N = number of turns in coil, and n = number of rotations
of coil per second. i, = ¢,/R if R is the resistance of load connected in the
external circuit.

- 10.16 FREQUENCY OF a.c. IN HOUCEHOLD

SUPPLIES

In our houses, we have electric supply of
frequency 50 Hz (n = 50 Hz) ie., the polarity at
the supply terminal changes 100 times a second
(50 times + and 50 times —).

Difference between the d.c. and a.c.

If a resistor is connected across the terminals
of a battery, a current flows in the circuit, the
magnitude of which remains constant and it
always flows in a direction from positive terminal
of the battery to its negative terminal. But if a
resistor is connected at the output terminals of an
a.c. generator (or mains in our house), the
magnitude of current in resistor changes
periodically (the current repeats its value after

each time interval equal to a s) and its direction
also changes (it is in one direction for Too S and
then in reverse direction for the next a”

A current of constant magnitude and unique
direction, is called d.c., while a current changing
its magnitude as well as direction periodically, is
called a.c. A battery is a d.c. source, while the
a.c. generator and mains are the a.c. sources.

DISTINCTION BETWEEN D.C. AND A.C.

Advantage of a.c. over d.c.

In India, we use 220 volt a.c. in our houses
and factories. The use of a.c. is advantageous over
d.c. because only the voltage of a.c. can be
increased by the use of step up transformer at the
power generating station and then can be
decreased by the use of step down transformer for
transmission in the city. It reduces the loss of


===== PAGE 24 =====

electrical energy as heat in the transmission line
wires. If d.c. is generated at the power generating
station, its voltage cannot be increased for
transmission, and so due to passage of high
current in the transmission line wires, there will
be a huge loss of electrical energy as heat in the
line wires.

10.17 DISTINCTION BETWEEN AN A.C.
GENERATOR AND D.C. MOTOR

A.C. generator | | D.C. motor

1. A generator is adevice | 1. Ad.c. motor is a device
which converts the which converts the electrical
mechanical energy into energy into the mechanical
the electrical energy. energy.

2. A generator works on the | 2. A d.c. motor works on the
principle of electro- principle of force acting
magnetic induction. on a current carrying

conductor placed in a
magnetic field.

3. In a generator, the coil is | 3. In a d.c. motor, the current

rotated in a magnetic from a d.c. source flows
field so as to produce an in the coil placed in a
electric current. magnetic field due to which
the coil rotates.
4. A generator makes use | 4. A d.c. motor makes use of
of two separate coaxial two parts of a slip ring

slip rings. (ie., split ring) which

acts as a commutator.

Similarities between an A.C. generator and
a D.C. motor

(1) Both in an a.c. generator and d.c. motor, a
coil rotates in a magnetic field between the
pole pieces of a powerful electromagnet.

(2) Both in an a.c. generator and d.c. motor, there
is a transformation of energy from one form

to the other form.

10.18 TRANSFORMER

In our daily life, we use various electrical
appliances which require working voltage
different from the voltage of mains (i.e., 220 V)
e.g. a door bell needs 6 V, while the cathode ray
tube in a_ television needs nearly 10,000 V. To
provide suitable voltage to different appliances
from the mains, we use transformers with them.

Thus, ”

Transformer is a device by which the magnitude

of an alternating e.m.f. can be increased or
decreased.

A transformer does not affect the frequency of
the alternating voltage. The frequency remains
unchanged (= 50 Hz).

Principle : A transformer works on the
principle of electromagnetic induction and makes
use of two coils having different number of turns.
The two coils are : (1) the primary coil, and
(2) the secondary coil. The given alternating
e.m.f., of which magnitude is to be changed, is
applied across the primary coil and the appliance
in which output is to be obtained is connected
across the secondary coil. When there is a change
in the magnetic field lines due to varying current
in the primary coil, the number of magnetic field
lines linked with the secondary coil changes and
so an induced varying current of same frequency,
but of different magnitude flows in the secondary
coil.

A transformer cannot be used with the direct
current (d.c.) source because if current in primary
coil is constant (i.e., d.c.), then there will be no
change in the number of magnetic field lines
linked with the secondary coil and hence no
e.m.f. will be induced in the secondary coil.

Construction : A transformer consists of a
rectangular soft iron core made up from the thin
laminated sheets of soft iron of T and U shape,
placed alternately one above the other and
insulated from each other by a paint (or varnish)
coating over tem as shown in Fig. 10.35. This
forms a simple rectangular core.

Fig. 10.35 Laminated iron core


===== PAGE 25 =====

On one arm of the core, the primary coil P
of insulated copper wire is wound. This coil is
connected with the source of alternating e.m.f.
(i.e., at the ends of this coil, the input is given).
On the other arm of the core, secondary coil S
of insulated copper wire is wound. The induced
alternating e.m.f. is obtained across the terminals
of this coil (i.e., output is obtained at the ends
of this coil). The ratio of number of turns N, in
secondary coil to the number of turns N, in
primary coil (i.e., N,/ N,) is called the turns
ratio. i.é.,

...(10.5)

Note : (1) The laminated core prevents the
loss of energy due to induced (or eddy)
currents in the core. (2) The advantage of
using a closed core is that it gives a closed
path for the magnetic field lines and therefore
almost all the magnetic field lines, caused due

to current in the primary coil, remain linked
with the secondary coil (i.e., the flux linkage
is nearly perfect) and loss of energy is avoided.
(3) The core is made of soft iron (or hysteresis)
so that the loss of energy in the core gets
minimised.

Working : When the terminals of primary coil
are connected to the source of alternating e.m-f.,
a varying current flows through the primary coil.
This varying current produces a varying magnetic
field in the core of transformer. Thus the number
of magnetic field lines linked with the secondary
coil vary due to which an e.m.f. induces in it.
The induced e.m.f. varies in the same manner as
the applied e.m.f. in the primary coil varies
and thus has the same frequency as that of the
applied e.m.f.

For a transformer,

e.m.f. across the secondary coil (E,)

e.m.f. across the primary coil (Ep)
number of turns in the secondary coil (Ns)

= number of turns in the primary coil (Np)

or | ...(10.6)

Thus the magnitude of e.m.f. induced in the

secondary coil depends on the following two
factors :

(1) the ratio of the number of turns in the
secondary coil to the number of turns in the
primary coil (i.e., turns ratio), and

(2) the magnitude of e.mf. applied. in the primary

coil.

For an ideal transformer, when there is no
energy loss, the output power will be equal to the
input power. i.e.,

power in secondary coil = power in primary coil

or

Types of transformers : There are two types
of transformers : (1) step up transformer, and
(2) step down transformer.

(1) Step up transformer : The transformer used
to change a low alternating voltage to a high
alternating voltage (of same frequency) is
called a step up transformer (i.e., E,; > Ep).
In a step up transformer, the number of turns
in the secondary coil is more than
the number of turns in the primary coil
(N,> N,) i.e., turns ratio n > | as shown in
Fig. 10.36. Since current in primary coil is

Fig. 10.36 Step up and step down transformers


===== PAGE 26 =====

more than in secondary coil (or J, > /,), so
the wire in the primary coil is thicker than
in the secondary coil.

Step down transformer : The transformer
used to change a high alternating voltage to
a low alternating voltage (of same frequency)
is called a step down transformer (E, < E,).
In a step down transformer, the number of
turns in the secondary coil are less than
the number of turns in the primary coil
(N,< N,) ie., turns ratio n < 1 as shown in

(2)

Fig. 10.37. Since current in secondary
coil is more than in the primary coil (ie.,
I, > Ip) so the wire in secondary coil is
thicker than in the primary coil.

P|] PRIMARY P
Fig. 10.37 Step down transformer

Note : The use of thicker wire in a coil
reduces its resistance and therefore reduces the

loss of energy as heat in that coil (This energy
loss due to heat is known as copper loss).

Examples : (1) If we want to transmit
1-1 kW, 220 V electric power at 11 kV, we use
a step up transformer which will step up

= 220 V to E, = 11 kV (= 11000 V). The
turns ratio for this transformer will be

11000 50

n= = = = =

>] ee

i.e., the number of turns in the secondary coil will
be 50 times that of the primary coil. The current in
P 111000 W

primary coil will be J, = v= mov =5A
while for the same output power (= 1-1 kW), current
in secondary coil will be 1, = *427000W = 0.1 a.

Hence the primary winding has to be of a thicker
wire as compared to that of the secondary winding
to reduce the heat (or copper) loss.

(2) If we want to run a 6 W, 12 V bulb with
our mains supply of 240 V, we use a step down
transformer which will step down E, = 240 V to
E, = 12 V. The turns ratio for this transformer
will be

Ns Es _ 12 1

n= =
Np Ep

240 20

i.e., the number of turns in the secondary coil will
be one-twentieth of that in the primary coil. Further
as the output power is 6 W, the input power will
also be 6 W. Therefore current in primary coil is

sv = 0-025 A = 25 “ while current in

secondary coil will be J, = Ss = 0-5 A. Hence
the secondary winding has to be of a thicker wire
as compared to that of the primary winding to
reduce the heat (or copper) loss.

Uses of transformers : In our houses, both
type of transformers are used with electrical
appliances which operate at a voltage other
than the voltage supplied by the mains (e.g., a
door bell needs 6 V, mils a T.V. requires nearly
10,000 V).

(A) Uses of step up transformers :

(1) In transmission of electric power at the
power generating station to step up the
voltage.

(2) With television.

(3) With wireless sets.

(4) With X-ray tubes to provide a high
accelerating voltage.

(B) Uses of step down transformers :

(1) With electric bells, night electric bulbs,
mobile phones, computers, etc.

(2) At the power sub-stations to step down the
voltage before its distribution to the
consumers.


===== PAGE 27 =====

Distinction between the step bia and = down transformers

1. Fig. 10.38 shows a coil AB connected to a centre
zero galvanometer G and a magnet NS.

i

Fig. 10.38

(i) What will you observe when : (a) the magnet
is inserted into the coil, (b) the magnet is taken
out of the coil ?

(ii) How will your observation in part (i) change
if the number of turns in the coil is increased?

(iii) State the direction of current in the coil in

part (i) (a).

(iv) State the law by which you arrived to the

answer in part (iii).

(i) (a) As the magnet enters the coil, a momentary
deflection is observed in the galvanometer so
long the magnetic field lines linked with the
coil increases. As the magnet completely
enters inside the coil, the deflection becomes
zero.

(b) On taking the magnet out of the coil, again a
momentary deflection is observed in the
galvanometer in a direction opposite to that in
part (a) above. The deflection lasts so long as
the magnetic field lines linked with the coil
decreases.

(ii) On increasing the number of turns in the coil, the
deflection observed in part (i) will increase.

(iii) In part (i) (a), the current in coil will be from

A to B (i.e. anticlockwise as seen from above, so
that the end of the coil near the N pole of the
magnet becomes the north pole).

(iv) According to Lenz’s law, the current induced in
the coil is such that it opposes the cause of its
origin.

. Two coils P and Q are placed as shown in

Fig. 10.39. The coil A is connected to a battery B
and a key K, while the coil Q is connected to a
centre zero galvanometer G.
What will you observe in the galvanometer G
when
(i) the key K is closed ?
(ii) the key K is opened ?
(iii) with the key K closed, the coil P is moved
rapidly towards the coil Q ?
(iv) with the key K closed, the coil Q is moved
rapidly towards the coil P ?
(v) with the key K closed, the coils P and Q are
moved away from each other ?
(vi) with the key K closed, the coils P and Q
are moved with the same speed in same
direction ?

J 0000

a(t)

Fig. 10.39

(i) As the key K is closed, the galvanometer needle
deflects for a moment and then returns to zero.

RS, cae ceenn


===== PAGE 28 =====

(ii) As the key K is opened, again a momentary
deflection (but more) is observed in the
galvanometer in the opposite direction.

(iii) With the key K closed, if the coil P is moved
rapidly towards the coil Q, a deflection is
obtained in the galvanometer in the direction
same as in case (i). But the deflection lasts so
long as the coil P moves.

(iv) With the key K closed, if the coil Q is moved
rapidly towards the coil P, again a deflection is
observed in the galvanometer in direction same
as in case (i). The deflection lasts so long as the
coil Q moves.

(v) With the key K closed, if the coils P and Q are
moved away from each other, a deflection is
obtained in the galvanometer in direction same as
in case (ii). The deflection lasts so long as there
is relative motion between the coils.

(vi) With the key K closed, if the coils P and Q are
moved with the same speed in the same direction,
there is no deflection in the galvanometer.

3. The diagram in Fig. 10.40 shows two coils X and Y.
The coil X is connected to a battery B and a key
K. The coil Y is connected to a galvanometer G.

Fig. 10.40 S

When the key K is closed, state the polarity

(i) at the end Q of the coil X,

(ii) at the end R of the coil Y,

(iii) at the end R of the coil Y if the coil Y is
(a) moved towards the coil X, (b) moved away
from the coil X.

(i) On closing the key K, the current at the end Q of
the coil X is anticlockwise, therefore at this end
there is a north pole.

(ii) While closing the key, polarity at the end R of
the coil Y will be north. But there will be no
polarity at the end R of the coil Y when the
current becomes steady in the coil X after the key
has been closed.

(iii)(a) With the key K closed, while the coil Y is
moved towards the coil X, the polarity at the
end R of the coil Y is north.

(b) With the key K closed, while the coil Y is

moved away from the coil X, the polarity at
the end R of the coil Y is south.

4. A coil has 50 turns and the magnetic flux linked
with the coil increases by 0-5 weber in 10-0 s.
Calcualte the e.m.f. induced in the coil.

Given : increase in magnetic flux = 0-5 weber,
time t = 10-0 s, N = 50.
e.m.f. induced e
= N x rate of increase of magnetic flux
05
= 50x 100 = 0-25 V

5. A flat rectangular coil is rotated between the pole
pieces of a horse-shoe magnet. (a) In which
position of coil with respect to the magnetic field,
will the e.m.f. be (i) maximum, and (ii) zero. (b)
When does the e.m.f. change its direction ?

(a) (i) The e.m.f. is maximum when the plane of coil
is parallel to the magnetic field.
(ii) The e.m.f. is zero when the plane of coil is
normal to the magnetic field.
(b) The e.m.f. will change its direction when the

plane of coil passes from the position normal
to the magnetic field.

6. (i) Name the principle on which a transformer
works.

(ii) What is the function of a step up transformer ?

(iii) Draw a simple labelled diagram of a
step down transformer.

(iv) Can a transformer work when it is
connected to a d.c. source ? Give a reason.

(v) Draw a simple labelled diagram of a step up
transformer.

(i) A transformer works on the principle of
electromagnetic induction.

(ii) The function of a step up transformer is to
convert a low a.c. voltage to a high a.c.
voltage.

(iii) Fig 10.41 shows a simple labelled diagram of
a step down transformer.

SOFT IRON LAMINATED CORE

Fig. 10.41 Step down transformer

ae


===== PAGE 29 =====

SOFT IRON LAMINATED CORE

(iv) No. A wanstormer ‘camrot work wnen mt 1s’
connected to a d.c. source because there will
then be no change in the magnetic flux linked
with the secondary coil.

(v) Fig 10.42 shows a simple labelled diagram of
a step up transformer.

Fig. 10.42 Step up transformer

1. (a) What is electromagnetic induction ? (ii) The current is switched off in a wire held near
(b) Describe one experiment to demonstrate the a loop of wire.
phenomenon of electromagnetic induction. (iii) A magnet is moved through a loop of wire.
2. State Faraday’s laws of electromagnetic induction. (iv) A loop of wire is held near a magnet.

3. State two factors on which the magnitude of induced Ans. In cases (i), (ii) and (iii)
e.m.f. in a coil depend. 9. A conductor is moved in a varying magnetic field.
Name the law which determines the direction of

current induced in the conductor.
Ans. Fleming’s right hand rule

Ans. (i) rate of change in magnetic flux with each turn
of coil, (ii) the number of turns in the coil.

4. (a) What kind of energy change takes place when a ‘ ;
magnet is moved towards a coil having | 10. State Fleming's right hand rule.

a galvanometer between its ends ? li. What is Lenz’s law ?
(b) Name the phenomenon. 12. Why does it heocme more difficult to move a
Ans. (a) mechanical energy changes to the magnet towards a coil when the number of turns in
electrical energy. a coil have been increased ?
(b) electromagnetic induction. (Hint : e.m.f. induced in the coil becomes more
5. (a) How would you demonstrate that a momentary when the number of turns in the coil are increased.
current can be obtained by the suitable use of a The e.m.f. induced opposes the motion of the
magnet, a coil of wire and a galvanometer ? magnet towards the coil).
(b) What is the source of energy associated with the | 15. Explain why an induced current must flow in such
current obtained in part (a) ? a direction so as to oppose the change producing it.
Ans. (a) by moving the magnet towards the coil Ans, so that some mechanical energy is spent in
connected to the galvanometer (b) mechanical producing the change, which changes into the
energy spent in moving the magnet towards the electrical energy in form of the induced current.
coil. 14. Explain how does the Lenz’s law show the
6. (a) Describe briefly one way of producing an conservation of energy in the phenomenon of
induced e.mf. electromagnetic induction.
(b) State one factor that determines the magnitude | 15. The diagram in Fig.10.43 shows a coil of several
of induced e.m.f. in part (a) above. turns of copper wire near a magnet NS. The coil is
(c) What factor determines the direction of induced moved in the direction of arrow shown in the
e.m.f. in part (a) above ? diagram.

MAGNET

7. Complete the following sentence : ae
The current is induced in a closed circuit only if nae [Ns]
COTE IB! Sissi otiseesiss
Ans. change in number of magnetic field 4 i

lines linked with the circuit.

8. In which of the following cases e.m.f. is induced ? Fig. 10.43
(i) A current is started in a wire held near a loop (i) In what direction does the induced current flow
of wire. in the coil ?


===== PAGE 30 =====

16.

17.

18.

19.

(ii) Name the law used to arrive at the conclusion in part (i).

(iti) How would the current in coil be altered if
(a) the coil has twice the number of turns,
(b) the coil was made to move three times fast ?
Ans. (i) A to B, (ii) Lenz’s law (iii) (a) current
becomes twice (b) current becomes thrice.
The diagram in Fig. 10.44 shows a fixed coil of
several turns connected to a centre zero
galvanometer G and a magnet NS which can move
in the direction shown in the diagram.

(a) Describe the observation in the galvanometer if
(i) the magnet is moved rapidly, (ii) the magnet
is kept stationary after it has moved into the
coil, (iii) the magnet is then rapidly pulled out
of the coil.

COIL = 4 ___ DIRECTION OF MOTION

OOOO) Sa

MAGNET

®)

Fig. 10.44

(b) How would the observation in (i) of part (a)
change if a more powerful magnet is used ?

Ans. (a) (i) a deflection is observed in the
galvanometer towards the right, (ii) the deflection
becomes zero, (iii) the deflection again occurs in
opposite direction. (b) the deflection is increased.

The diagram in Fig. 10.45 shows a coil X connected
to a sensitive centre-zero galvanometer G and a
coil Y connected to a battery through a switch S.

Y BATTERY

Ss
Fig. 10.45

(a) Describe the observation when the switch S
is (i) closed suddenly, (ii) then kept closed,
and (iii) finally opened.

(b) Name and state the law which explains the
above observations.
Name and state the principle of a simple a.c.
generator. What is its use ?
What determines the frequency of a.c. produced in
a generator ?
Ans, the number of rotations of the coil in one
second (or the speed of rotation of the coil).
a

wW..

21.

22.

Rf

27.

29.

31.

32.

Draw a labelled diagram of a simple a.c. generator.

In an a.c. generator, the speed at which the coil
rotates is doubled. How would this affect (a) the
frequency of the output voltage, (b) the maximum
output voltage.

Ans. (a) frequency is doubled (b) maximum output
voltage is doubled.

State two ways to produce a higher e.m.f. in an a.c.
generator.

Ans. (i) by increasing the speed of rotation of coil,
(ii) by increasing the number of turns in the coil.
What energy conversion does take place in a
generator when it is in use ?

Ans. the mechanical energy changes into the
electrical energy.

State (i) two dis-similarities, and (ii) two similarities
between a d.c. motor and an a.c. generator.

State one advantage of using an a.c. over the d.c..

For what purpose are the transformers used ? Can
they be used with a direct current source ?

Ans. to step up or step down the a.c. voltage. No, a
transformer cannot be used with a d.c. source.
State two factors on which the magnitude of an
induced e.m.f. in the secondary coil of a transformer
depends.

Ans. (i) turns ratio, and (ii) the input voltage
How are the e.m.f. in the primary and secondary
coils of a transformer related with the number of
turns in these coils ?

Ans. (b) E,/E, = N,/N,

Draw a labelled diagram to show the various
components of a step up transformer.

Name the device used to transform 12 V a.c. to
200 V a.c. Name the principle on which it works.

Ans. step up transformer, electromagnetic induction

Draw a labelled diagram of a step up transformer
and explain how does it work. State two
characteristics of the primary coil as compared to its
secondary coil.

Draw a labelled diagram of a device you would
use to transform 200 V a.c. to 15 V a.c. Name
the device and explain how does it work. Give its
two uses.

Name the coil of which the wire is thicker in a
(i) step up, (ii) step down transformer. Give reason
to your answer.


===== PAGE 31 =====

a

36.

37.

(a) Complete the following diagram in Fig. 10.46
of a transformer and name the parts labelled A
and B.

(b) Name the part you have drawn to complete the
diagram in part (a).

(c) What is the material of the part named above ?

(d) Is this transformer a step-up or stepdown ? Give
reason.

INPUT A je OUTPUT

Fig. 10.46

The diagram in Fig. 10.47 shows the core of a
transformer and its input and output connections.

7 CORE

er r 3 output

A.C. MAINS 1s ey VAG
Fig. 10.47

(a) State the material used for the core and
describe its structure.

(b) Complete the diagram of the transformer
and connections by labelling all parts joined by
you.

(c) Name the transformer : step up or step down ?
The out put current of a transformer in which the
voltage is stepped down is usually higher than the
input current. Explain why.

Why is the iron core of a transformer made
laminated (thin sheets) instead of being in one solid
piece ?

Ans. to reduce the energy losses due to eddy currents.
38.

Complete the following sentences :

(i) In a step up transformer, the number of turns
in the primary are .......... than the number of
turns in the secondary.

(ii) The transformer is used in
circuits.

current

(iii) In a tranformer, the frequency of a.c. voltage
aaceeasinataeaasas (increase/decreases/remains same)
Ans. (i) less (ii) alternating (iii) remains same

29:

41.

42.

How do the input and output powers in a transformer
compare ? State the assumption made.
Name one kind of energy loss in a transformer. How
is it minimised ?
Give two points of difference between a step up and
a step down transformer.
Name the material of the core in (a) an electric bell,
(b) electromagnet, (c) a d.c. motor, (d) an a.c.
generator, and (e) a transformer.

Ans. soft iron, in each
Name the tranformer used in the (i) power
generating station, (ii) power sub-station.

State the function of each transfomer.

MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE

1.

2.

The direction of induced current is obtained by :
(a) Fleming’s left hand rule
(b) Clock rule
(c) Right hand thumb rule
(d) Fleming’s right hand rule.
Ans. (d) Fleming’s right hand rule.
In a step up transformer :
(a) N,=N, (b) N,<N,
(c) N,> N, (d) nothing can be said.
Ans. (c) N, > N,

NUMERICALS

1.

The magnetic flux through a coil having 100 turns
decreases from 5 milli weber to zero in 5 second.
Calculate the e.m.f. induced in the coil.

Ans. 100 mV

The primary coil of a transformer has 800 turns
and the secondary coil has 8 turns. It is connected to
a 220 V a.c. supply. What will be the output
voltage ? Ans, 2:2 volt

A transformer is designed to give a supply of 8 V to
ring a house-bell from the 240 V a.c. mains. The
primary coil has 4800 turns. How many turns will be
in the secondary coil ?

Ans. 160
The input and output voltages of a transformer are
220 V and 44 V respectively. Find : (a) the turns
ratio, (b) the current in input circuit if the output
current is 2 A. Ans. (a) 1:5 (b)0-4A
