

===== PAGE 1 =====

forces concept; moment of a force; forces in equilibrium; centre of gravity, (discussions using sme

and aie direct a

mn using a metre rule suspended by two spring balances with slotted weights fags from it; simple m
centre of gravity (qualitative only) with examples of some regular bodies and irregular lamina. 3

In class IX, we have read that a force when applied on a rigid body can cause only the motion
in it, while when applied on a non-rigid body can cause both the change in its size or shape and
the motion in it. In mathematical form, force applied on a body is defined as the rate of change in

aay) >

> dp >
ls F =ma

its linear momentum i.e, F = a
vector quantity and its S.I. unit is newton (symbol N) or kilogram-force (symbol kgf) where

(if mass m is constant). The force is a

1 kgf = g N if g is the acceleration due to gravity (= 9-8 m s~ on average).

(A) MOMENT OF A FORCE AND EQUILIBRIUM

1.1. TRANSLATIONAL AND ROTATIONAL

MOTIONS

A rigid body when acted upon by a force, can
have two kinds of motion :

(1) linear or translational motion, and
(2) rotational motion.

(1) Linear or translational motion

When a force acts on a stationary rigid body
which is free to move, the body starts moving in
a straight path in the direction of force. This is

Ball

Direction of
—— motion

Fig. 1.1 Translational motion

called the linear or translational motion. For
example in Fig. 1.1, on pushing a ball lying on
a floor, it begins to move.

(2) Rotational motion

If the body is pivoted at a point and the force
is applied on the body at a suitable point, it
rotates the body about the axis passing through
the pivoted point. This is the turning effect of the
force and the motion of body is called the
rotational motion. For example, if a wheel is
pivoted at its centre and a force is applied
tangentially on its rim as iauas
shown in Fig. 1.2, the ~~
wheel rotates about its
centre. Similarly when a
force is applied normally

on the handle of a door, Fig. 1.2 Rotational motion


===== PAGE 2 =====

the door begins to rotate about an axis passing
through the hinges on which the door rests.

1.2 MOMENT (TURNING EFFECT) OF A
FORCE OR TORQUE

Consider a body which is
pivoted at a point O. If a
force F is applied horizontally
on the body with its line of
action in the direction FP as
shown in Fig. 1.3, the force is
unable to produce linear
motion of the body in its
direction because the body is not free to move,
but this force turns (or rotates) the body about the
vertical axis passing through the point O, in the
direction shown by the arrow in Fig. 1.3 (i.e., the
force rotates the body anticlockwise).

Fig. 1.3 Moment
of a force

Factors affecting the turning of a body

The turning effect on a body by a force
depends on the following two factors :

(1)
(2)

the magnitude of the force applied, and

the distance of line of action of the force
from the axis of rotation (or pivoted point).

Indeed, the turning effect on the body depends
on the product of both the above stated factors.
This product is called the moment of force (or
torque). Thus, the body rotates due to the moment
of force (or torque) about the pivoted point. In
other words,

“3

Measurement of moment of force (or torque)

of r
at

In Fig. 1.3, the line of action of force F is
shown by the dotted line FP and the
perpendicular drawn from the pivoted point O on
the line of action of force is OP. Therefore,

ome
et 5 |

Moment of force about the axis passing through the
point O

Force x Perpendicular distance
of force from the point O
F x OP

(1.1)

Note : For producing maximum turning
effect on a body by a given force, the force is
applied on the body at a point for which the

perpendicular distance of line of action of the
force from the axis of rotation is maximum so
that the given force may provide the maximum
torque to turn the body.

Units of moment of force
Unit of moment of force
= unit of force x unit of distance

The S.I. unit of force is newton and that of
distance is metre, so the S.I. unit of moment
of force is newton x metre. This is abbreviated
as N m.*

The C.GS. unit of moment of force is
dyne x cm.

But if force is measured in gravitational unit,
then the unit of moment of force in S.I. system
is kgf x m and in C.GS. system, the unit is
gf x cm.

These units are related as follows :

1 N m= 10° dyne x 10? cm
= 10’ dyne cm
1 kgf x m=9-'8 Nm
1 gf x cm = 980 dyne cm

Clockwise and anticlockwise moments :
Conventionally, if the effect on the body is to turn
it anticlockwise, moment of force is called the
anticlockwise moment and it is taken positive,
while if the effect on the body is to turn it
clockwise, the moment of force is called the
clockwise moment and it is taken negative.

.(1.2)

and

* The unit N m of moment of force (or torque) is not written joule (J).
However the unit N m for work or energy is written joule (J) because
torque is a vector, while work or energy is a sealar quantity.


===== PAGE 3 =====

The moment of force is a vector quantity. The
direction of anticlockwise moment is along the
axis of rotation outwards, while of clockwise
moment is along the axis of rotation inwards.

On applying a force on a pivoted body, its
direction of rotation depends on (a) the point of
application of the force, and (b) the direction of
force. Fig. 1.4(a) shows the anticlockwise and
clockwise moments produced in a disc pivoted at
its centre by changing the point of application of
the force F from point A to point B. Fig. 1.4(b)
shows the anticlockwise and clockwise moments
produced on a pivoted axle by changing the
direction of force F at the free end of the axle.

B r__B
=
F.
A A
ANTICLOCKWISE CLOCKWISE
(POSITIVE) (NEGATIVE)

(a) By changing the point of application of force

ANTICLOCKWISE CLOCKWISE
(POSITIVE) (NEGATIVE)

(b) By changing the direction of force
Fig. 1.4 Anticlockwise and clockwise moments

Common examples of moment of force

(1) To open or shut a door, we apply a force (push
or pull) F normal to the door at its handle P
which is provided at the maximum distance
from the hinges as shown in Fig. 1.5.

We can notice that if we apply the force at a
point Q (near the hinge R), much greater
force is required to open the door and if the
force is applied at the hinge R, we will not
be able to open the door howsoever large the
force may be (because of the force at R,
torque will be zero). Thus the handle P is
provided near the free end of the door so that
a smaller force at a larger perpendicular
distance produces the moment of force
required to open or shut the door.

(2)

(3)

(4)

HANDLE

Fig. 1.5 Opening of a door

The upper circular stone of a hand flour
grinder is provided with a handle near its rim
(i.e., at the maximum distance from centre)
so that it can easily be rotated about the iron
pivot at its centre by applying a small force
at the handle.

For turning a steering wheel, a force is
applied tangentially on the rim of the wheel
(Fig. 1.6). The sense of rotation of wheel is
changed by changing the point of application
of force without changing the direction of
force. In Fig. 1.6 (a), when force F is applied
at the point A of the wheel, the wheel rotates
anticlockwise; while in Fig. 1.6 (b), the wheel
rotates clockwise when the force F in same
direction is applied at the point B of the
wheel.

(a) ANTICLOCKWISE
ROTATION

(b) CLOCKWISE
ROTATION

Fig. 1.6 Sense of rotation changed by the change

of point of application of force
In a bicycle, to turn the wheel anticlockwise,
a small force is applied on the foot pedal of
a toothed wheel of size bigger than the rear
wheel so that the perpendicular distance of

= "REAR WHEEL
Fig. 1.7 Turning of toothed wheel of a bicycle


===== PAGE 4 =====

the point of application of force from the axle
of wheel is large (Fig. 1.7). The two wheels
are joined by a chain through their tooth.

(5) A spanner used to tighten or loosen a nut,
has a long handle to produce a large moment
of force by a small force applied normally at
the end of its handle as shown in Fig. 1.8.
The spanner is turned anticlockwise to loosen
the nut by applying the force in the direction
shown in Fig. 1.8, while it is turned
clockwise to tighten the nut by applying the
force in a direction opposite to that shown
in Fig. 1.8.

HANDLE
(wn
FORCE

Fig. 1.8 Spanner (wrench) used to loosen a nut

Conclusion : From the above examples, we
conclude that the turning of a body about an axis
depends not only on the magnitude of the force,
but it also depends on the perpendicular distance
of the line of action of the applied force from the
axis of rotation. Larger the perpendicular distance,
less is the force needed to turn the body.

1.3 COUPLE

A single force applied on a pivoted body
alone does not cause rotation of the body.
Actually the rotation is always produced by a
pair of forces. In the above examples, the rotation
is due to the force externally applied and the
force of reaction produced at the pivoted point.
The force of reaction at the pivot is equal in
magnitude, but opposite in direction to the applied
force. The moment of the force of reaction about
the pivot is zero because its distance from the
axis of rotation is zero, so the force of reaction
at the fixed point (or pivot) is not shown in
Fig. 1.3 to Fig. 1.8. Such a pair of forces is called
a couple. Thus two equal and opposite parallel
forces, not acting along the same line, form a
couple. A couple is always needed to produce a
rotation. For example, when we open a door, the
rotation of the door is produced by a couple

a

consisting of two forces : (i) the force which we
exert at the handle of the door, and (ii) an equal
and opposite force of reaction at the hinge.

In case if we require a larger turning effect,
the two forces, equal in magnitude and opposite
in directions, are applied on the body explicitly
such that both the forces turn the body in the
same direction.

Example : To open the nut of a car wheel,
we apply equal forces, each F, at the two ends
of the wrench’s arm in opposite directions as
shown in Fig. 1.9.

HOLDING
A NUT:

(a) Car wrench

(b) Wrench
Fig. 1.9 Opening the nut of acar wheel bya wrench

Similarly turning a water tap (Fig. 1.10),
tightening the cap of an inkpot (Fig. 1.11),
turning the key in the hole of a lock (Fig. 1.12),
winding a clock (or a watch) with the key,
turning the steering of a motor-car (Fig. 1.13),
driving the pedal of a bicycle, etc., are the other
examples where a pair of forces (couple) is
applied for rotation.

sy
& 2

im

aM
aw

Fig. 1.10 Turning a
water tap

OD

\E
if AN
a

Fig. 1.12 Turning a key
in a lock

Fig. 1.11 Tightening
the cap

Fig. 1.13 Turning a
steering wheel


===== PAGE 5 =====

Moment of couple : Fig. 1.14 illustrates the
action of a couple. AB is a bar which is pivoted
at a point O. At the ends A and B, two equal and
opposite forces, each of magnitude F, are applied.
The perpendicular distance between the two
forces is AB (= d) which is called the couple
arm. The two forces cannot produce the
translational motion as their resultant sum in any
direction is zero, but each force has the turning
effect on the bar in the same direction. Thus the
two forces together form a couple which rotates
the bar about the point O. In Fig. 1.14, the two

forces rotate the bar in anticlockwise direction.

—_
F

A B

Fig. 1.14 Couple action

Moment of force F at the end A

= FxOA (anticlockwise)
Moment of force F at the end B
= F x OB (anticlockwise)

Total moment of couple (i.e., moment of both
the forces) = F x OA + F x OB

F x (OA + OB) = F x AB
=Fxd (anticlockwise)

In other words, the moment of couple is equal
to the product of the either force and the
perpendicular distance between the line of action
of both the forces.

1.4 EQUILIBRIUM OF BODIES

We have read that when a force acts on a
body, it can produce translational motion if the
body is free to move or can produce rotational
motion if the body is fixed at a point. But it is
possible to apply a number of forces (two or
more) such that (i) the resultant of all forces is
zero, so they do not change the state of rest or

motion of the body, and (ii) the algebraic sum of
moments of all forces about the fixed point is
zero, so they do not change the rotational state
of the body, then the body is said to be in
equilibrium. Thus

Kinds of equilibrium

The equilibrium is of two kinds : (1) static
equilibrium, and (2) dynamic equilibrium.

(1) Static equilibrium : When a body remains
in the state of rest under the influence of several
forces, the body is in static equilibrium.

Examples : (i) In Fig. 1.15, if a body lying
on the table top is pulled by a force F to its left
and by an equal force F to its right (along the
same line), the body does not move. The reason
is that the applied forces are equal and opposite
along the same line, so they balance each other
(i.e., there is no net horizontal force on the body).
Hence the body remains at rest (i.e., in static
equilibrium).

Fig. 1.15 A body is static equilibrium

(ii) If a book is lying on a table, the weight
of the book exerted on the table vertically
downwards is balanced by the equal and opposite
force of reaction exerted by the table on the book
vertically upwards. Thus, the book is in static
equilibrium.

(iii) In a beam balance when the beam is
balanced in horizontal position, the clockwise
moment of force due to object on its right pan
balances the anticlockwise moment of force due
to weights on its left pan and the beam has no
rotational motion i.e., it is in static equilibrium.


===== PAGE 6 =====

(2) Dynamic equilibrium : When a body
remains in the same state of motion (translational
or rotational), under the influence of the several
forces, the body is said to be in dynamic
equilibrium.

Examples : (i) A rain drop reaches the earth
surface with a constant velocity. The weight of
the falling drop is balanced by the sum of the
buoyant force and the force due to friction (or
viscosity) of air. Thus, the net force on the drop
is zero, so it moves with a constant velocity.

(ii) An aeroplane moves at a constant height
when upward lift on it balances its weight
downwards.

(iii) A stone tied at the end of a string when
whirled in a circular path with a uniform speed
is in dynamic equilibrium because the tension in
string provides the centripetal force required for
circular motion*. Similarly the motion of a
planet around the sun or the motion of a satellite
around the planet or the motion of an electron
around the nucleus of an atom, are in dynamic
equilibrium.

Conditions for equilibrium

From the above examples, we find that the
following two conditions must be satisfied for a
body to be in equilibrium.

(1) The resultant of all the forces acting on the

body should be equal to zero.

(2) The algebraic sum of moments of all the
forces acting on the body about the point of
rotation should be zero i.e., the sum of the
anticlockwise moments about the axis of
rotation must be equal to the sum of the
clockwise moments about the same axis.

1.5 PRINCIPLE OF MOMENTS

When several forces act on a pivoted body,
they tend to rotate it about an axis passing
through the pivot. The resultant moment of all the
forces about the pivoted point is obtained by

* Refer article 1.7.

aaa

taking the algebraic sum of the moment of each
force about that point. To find the algebraic sum,
the anticlockwise moment is taken positive, while
the clockwise moment is taken negative.
According to the principle of moments, if the
algebraic sum of moments of all the forces, acting
on the body, about the axis of rotation is zero,
the body is in equilibrium. Thus

A physical balance (or beam balance) works
on the principle of moments.

Verification of the principle of moments

Suspend a metre rule horizontally from a fixed
support by means of a strong thread at O as
shown in Fig. 1.16. Now suspend two spring
balances A and B on the metre rule with some
slotted weights W, and W, on them on either side
of the thread. The metre rule may tilt to one side.
Now adjust either the slotted weights on the
spring balance or the position of the spring
balance on either side of thread in such a way
that the metre rule again becomes horizontal.

We W,

Fig. 1.16 Verification of principle of moments

Let the weight suspended on the right side of
thread from the spring balance A be W, at a
distance OA = /,, while the weight suspended
on the left side of the thread from the spring
balance B be W, at a distance OB = J,.


===== PAGE 7 =====

The weight W, tend to turn the metre rule

clockwise, while the weight W, tend to turn the
metre rule anticlockwise.

Clockwise moment of weight W, about the
point O = W, x 1,

Anticlockwise moment of weight W, about the
point O = W, x l,

In equilibrium, when the metre rule is

horizontal, it is found that W,/, = W,1,

i.e., clockwise moment = anticlockwise
moment

This verifies the principle of moments.

(a)

. A body is pivoted at a point. A force of 10 N is

applied at a distance of 30 cm from the pivot.
Calculate the moment of force about the pivot.
Given, F= 10N, r= 30cm =0-3 m

Moment of force = Fx r=10x0-3=3Nm

The moment of a force of 5 N about a point P is
2 N m. Calculate the distance of point of application
of the force from the point P.

Given, moment of force = 2 Nm, F=5N

If the distance of point of application of force from the
point P is r metre, then

Moment of force = force x distance

5xr

2
5 704m

or 2

r=

. A mechanic can open a nut by applying a force of

150 N while using a lever handle of length 40 cm.

How long handle is required if he wants to open it

by applying a force of only 50 N ?

In the first case, F = 150 N, r= 40 cm =0-4m

The moment of force needed to open the nut
=150Nx04m=60Nm

In the second case, F = 50 N,

If he uses the handle of length L m, then

Moment of force = 50N x Lm=S5O0OLNm

From egns. (i) and (ii),

SOL = 60
60
or L= jo =i2m

. The iron door of a building is 3 m broad. It can be

opened by applying a force of 100 N normally at
the middle of the door. Calculate : (a) the torque
needed to open the door, (b) the least force and its
point of application to open the door.

Given, F = 100 N, distance of point of application of

force, r= 3 x breadth of door = 5 x 3.m= 1-5 m

Moment of the force needed to open the door

=Fxr =100Nx15m=150Nm _ ..(i)
The force required will be least if it is applied at the
farthest point from the hinges. Therefore the force should
be applied at the free end of the door. i.e., at distance of
3 m from the hinges.
Let the required force be F’ newton, then

Moment of force = F’x 3Nm sae(ii)
From eqns. (i) and (ii),
F’ x3 = 150

The wheel shown in the diagram (Fig. 1.17) has a
fixed axle passing through O. The wheel is kept
stationary under the action of (i) a horizontal force
F, at A and (ii) a vertical force F, at B.

(a) Show the direction of force F, in the diagram.

(b) Which of the force F, or A
F, is greater ?

Find the ratio between
the forces F, and F,.
Given : AO = 255 cm,
BO’ = 1:5 cm and O’O
= 2-0 cm.

The force F, applied at A
produces a clockwise
moment on the wheel.
It can be balanced by
applying the force F, at B
in a direction such that it
produces an anticlockwise
moment. Therefore the
vertical force at B
should be applied in the
downward direction as shown in Fig. 1.18. In
equilibrium, F, x OA = F, x OO’.

(c

~

(a)

Fig. 1.18


===== PAGE 8 =====

(b) Since the perpendicular distance OA of point of
application of force F, from O is greater than the
perpendicular distance OO’ of point of application of
the force F, from O, so in magnitude, the force F, is
greater than the force F,.
Moment of force F, about O = F, x OA (clockwise)
Moment of force F, about O = F, x OO’
(anticlockwise)
When the wheel is in equilibrium position,
Clockwise moment = Anticlockwise moment
F,xOA = F,x OO’
F2 OA 4
. Fy = 00" sseeel (i)
Given, OA = 2:5 cm and OO’ = 2.0 cm
Substituting the values of OA and OO’ in eqn. (i),
the ratio of forces

F .
= or F,: F,=5:4
6. The following diagram (Fig. 1.19) shows two
parallel and opposite forces F, and F, each of
magnitude 5 N, with their lines of action separated
by a distance of 2 m. A point X lies midway
between F, and F,, while a point Y lies on F,.
(a) Calculate the total moment of the two forces
about the points (i) X, and (ii) Y.
(b) State the effect produced by the two forces
about the points X and Y.

(c

YL

Le,

Y
i F,=5N
2m x
|
F, =5N
Fig. 1.19

(a) (i) Perpendicular distance of point X from either of the

forces F, or F, is 4 x2m=lm
-. Moment of force F,; about X= 5 Nx 1m
= 5 N m (clockwise)
and moment of force F, about X =5 Nx 1m
= 5 N m (clockwise)
Hence total moment of the two forces about X
=5+5=10N m (clockwise)
Perpendicular distance of point Y from the force F, is
2 m, while it is zero from the force F,.
«. Moment of force F, about Y =5Nx2m
= 10 N m (clockwise)
and moment of force F, about Y = 0
Hence total moment of the two forces about Y
= 10 N m (clockwise)

Gi)

(b) (i) The effect of the two forces about the point X is to
produce the clockwise rotation.

(ii) The effect of the two forces about the point Y is to
produce the clockwise rotation.

7. Two forces each of magnitude 2 N act vertically
upwards and downwards respectively at the two ends
of a uniform rod of length 1 m which is pivoted at its
centre. Draw a diagram of the arrangement and
determine the resultant moment of forces about the
mid-point of the rod.

The arrangement is shown in Fig. 1.20 given below. AB
is the rod which is pivoted at its centre O.

F =2N

fe)

Fig. 1.20 ome

Given, AB=1m .. OA =OB=05m
Moment of force F (= 2 N) at A about the point O
= Fx OA = 2x0-5=1-0N m (clockwise)
Moment of force F (= 2 N) at B about the point O
= Fx OB = 2x05 =1-0N m (clockwise)
«. Total moment of forces about the mid-point O
= 10+ 1-0 = 2-0 N m (clockwise).

8. A uniform metre rule rests horizontally on a knife
edge at the 60 cm mark when a mass of 10 g is
suspended from one end. Draw diagram of the
arrangement.

(a) At which end must this mass be suspended ?
(b) What is the mass of the rule ?

(a) Fig. 1.21 shows a uniform metre rule AB which
rests horizontally on the knife edge at O (60 cm mark).
Let M g be the mass of the rule. A uniform rule has
same distribution of mass throughout its length, so its
weight Mg will act at its middle point i.e., at the 50 cm

mark.
i?) 50 60 100 cm

A B

fe)
10g

c_
MA
Fig. 1.21

The weight Mg of rule produces an anti-clockwise
moment about the knife edge O. In order to balance
it, 10 g mass must be suspended at the end B (i.e., at
the mark 100 cm) to produce a clockwise moment
about the knife edge O.


===== PAGE 9 =====

(b) From the principle of moments,

10.

Anticlockwise moment = Clockwise moment
Mg x (60-50) = 10 g x (100 - 60)
or Mgx10 10 g x 40
Mass of rule M = 40 g.

On a see-saw, two children of masses 30 kg and
50 kg are sitting on one side of it at distances 2 m
and 2°5 m respectively from its middle. Where
should a man of mass 74 kg sit to balance it ?
Let two children be sitting on the left arm. They will
produce anticlockwise moment due to their weights
about the middle point of see-saw.

Total anticlockwise moment

= 30 kgf x 2m + 50 kgf x 25m
= 60 kgf x m + 125 kgf x m= 185 kgf x m
To balance it, the man should sit on the right arm so
as to produce a clockwise moment about the middle
point. Let his distance from the middle be x m. Then
Clockwise moment = 74 kgf x x m = 74 x kgf x m
By the principle of moments, in equilibrium
Anticlockwise moment = Clockwise moment
185 = 74x

185
or x= Gyms 2-5 m (on the other side).

The man should sit at a distance 2-5 m from the middle
on the other side.

Fig. 1.22 below shows a uniform metre rule AB
pivoted at its end A at the zero mark and supported
at the other end B by a spring balance when a
weight of 40 kgf is suspended at its 40 cm mark.
This rule stays horizontal. Find the reading of the
spring balance when the rule is of (i) negligible
mass, (ii) mass 20 kg.

SPRING BALANCE

10 50 60 70 80 90 100cm

40 kof
Fig. 1.22
(i) When the rule is of negligible mass.
In the absence of support at the end B by the

State the condition when on applying a force, the body

has :

(a) the translational motion, (b) the rotational motion.
Ans. (a) When the body is free to move
(b) When the body is pivoted at a point.

spring balance, the rule will turn clockwise about
the pivot A due to weight 40 kgf at the 40 cm
mark. To keep the rule in equilibrium (i.e., horizontal),
a force F (say) is needed upwards at the end B as
shown in Fig. 1.23 which is provided ‘by the
spring balance. So the reading of the spring balance
will be F.

A— 10 o—__—_— By

<— 40cm F

R_% Vaoigt
Fig. 1.23
In equilibrium, as shown in Fig. 1.23,
Clockwise moment about the point A
= Anticlockwise moment about the point A
or 40 kgf x 40 cm = F x 100 cm
40x40
, F= 100 kgf = 16 kgf
Thus the reading of spring balance will be 16 kgf.

(ii) When the rule is of mass 20 kg i.e., weight 20 kgf.
The weight 20 kgf of the rule will act at the
50 cm mark, since the metre rule is uniform. As
shown in Fig. 1.24, both the weight 40 kgf and
the weight of rule 20 kgf produce clockwise
moments about the point O, so a force F is needed
upwards at the end B to keep the rule horizontal.

A <———100 em —_____ 8 \
CUE jh S68
<— 40cm F

Ns ae
RY
40 kat
Fig. 1.24

In equilibrium, as shown in Fig. 1.24,
Total clockwise moment about the point A

= Anticlockwise moment about the point A
or 40 kgf x 40 cm + 20 kgf x 50 cm

= Fx 100 cm

(40x 40) + (20x50)
F= 190. kef = 26 kef
Thus the reading of spring balance will be 26 kgf.

. Define moment of force and state its S.I. unit.

. State whether the moment of force is a scalar or vector

quantity ? Ans. Vector quantity

. State two factors affecting the turning effect of a force.

Say


===== PAGE 10 =====

10.

11.

12.

13.
14.

15.

16.

When does a body rotate ? State one way to change
the direction of rotation of the body. Give a suitable
example to explain your answer.

Write the expression for the moment of force about a
given axis.

State one way to reduce the moment of a given force
about a given axis of rotation.

State one way to obtain a greater moment of a force
about a given axis of rotation.

What do you understand by the clockwise and
anticlockwise moment of force ? When is it taken
positive ?

Why is it easier to open a door by applying the force
at the free end of it ?

The stone of a hand flour grinder is provided with a
handle near its rim. Give reason.

It is easier to turn the steering wheel of a large
diameter than that of a small diameter. Give reason.

A spanner (or wrench) has a long handle. Why ?

A, B and C are the three forces
each of magnitude 4 N acting in
the plane of paper as shown in
Fig. 1.25. The point O lies in the
same plane.
(i) Which force has the least
moment about O ? Give reason.
(ii) Which force has the greatest moment about O ?
Give reason.
(iii) Name the forces producing (a) clockwise,
(b) anticlockwise moments.
(iv) What is the resultant torque about the point O ?
Ans. (i) C, because the force C is nearest to O
(ii) A, because the force A is farthest from O.
(iii) (a) A and B, (b) C (iv) 4-4 N m (clockwise).
The adjacent diagram
(Fig. 1.26) shows a
heavy roller, with its
axle at O, which is to
be raised on a
pavement XY by
applying a minimum
possible force. Show by an arrow on the diagram the
point of application and the direction of force to be
applied.

Fig. 1.25

Fig. 1.26

A body is acted upon by two forces each of magnitude
F, but in opposite directions. State the effect of the
forces if

(a) both forces act at the same point of the body.

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.
22.

25.

26.

(b) the two forces act at two different points of the
body at a separation r.
Ans. (a) Resultant force = 0, moment of forces = 0, no’
motion (ii) Resultant force = 0, moment of
forces = Fr. The forces tend to rotate the body
about the mid-point between the two forces,
Draw a neat labelled diagram to show the direction of
two forces acting on a body to produce rotation in it.
Also mark the point O about which the rotation takes
place.
What do you understand by the term couple ? State its
effect. Give two examples of couple action in our daily
life.
Define moment of couple. Write its S.I. unit.
Prove that
Moment of couple = Force x couple arm.
What do you mean by equilibrium of a body ?
State the condition when a body is in (i) static,
(ii) dynamic, equilibrium. Give one example each of
static and dynamic equilibrium.
State two conditions for a body, acted upon by several
forces, to be in equilibrium.
State the principle of moments. Give one device as
application of it.
Describe a simple experiment to verify the principle
of moments, if you are supplied with a metre rule, a
fulcrum and two springs with slotted weights.
Complete the following sentences :
(i) The S.L. unit of moment of force is ............... :

(ii) In equilibrium algebraic sum of moments of all
forces about the point of rotation is ...............

(iii) In a beam balance when the beam is balanced in a
horizontal position, it is in equilibrium.

(iv) The moon revolving around the earth is in
equilibrium.
Ans. (i) N m (ii) Zero (iii) Static (iv) Dynamic

MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE

1,

The moment of a force about a given axis depends :
(a) only on the magnitude of force
(b) only on the perpendicular distance of force from
the axis
(c) neither on the force nor on the perpendicular
distance of force from the axis
(d) both, on the force and its perpendicular distance
from the axis.
Ans. (d) both, on the force and its
perpendicular distance from the axis.


===== PAGE 11 =====

2.

A body is acted upon by two unequal forces in
opposite directions, but not in same line. The effect is
that :
(a) the body will have only the rotational motion
(b) the body will have only the translational motion
(c) the body will have neither the rotational motion
nor the translational motion
(d) the body will have rotational as well as
translational motion. ;
Ans. (d) the body will have rotational
as well as translational motion

NUMERICALS
[Note : For a uniform rod, its weight acts at its mid-point.]

1.

5. Two forces each of

The moment of a force of 10 N about a fixed point O
is 5 N m. Calculate the distance of the point O from
the line of action of the force. Ans. 0-5 m

A nut is opened by a wrench of length 10 cm. If the
least force required is 5-0 N, find the moment of force
needed to turn the nut. Ans. 0-5 Nm

A wheel of diameter 2 m is
shown in Fig. 1.27 with axle
at O. A force F = 2 N is
applied at B in the direction
shown in figure. Calculate
the moment of force about A

(i) the centre O, and (ii) the Fig. 1.27
point A.

Ans. (i) 2 N m (clockwise), (ii) 4 N m (clockwise)
The diagram in Fig. 1.28 shows two forces F, = 5N
and F, = 3 N acting at points A and B of a rod pivoted
at a point O, such that OA = 2 m and OB = 4 m.

A__2m__ oO 4m B

F=2N

Fy=3N

F,=5N Fig. 1.28

Calculate :
(i) the moment of force F, about O.
(ii) the moment of force F, about O.
(iii) total moment of the two forces about O.
Ans. (i) 10 N m (anticlockwise),
(ii) 12 N m (clockwise), (iii) 2 N m (clockwise).

: 10.N
magnitude 10 N act

vertically upwards
and downwards
respectively at the
two ends A and B
of a uniform rod of

9.

10.

11.

length 4 m which is pivoted at its mid point O as
shown in Fig. 1.29. Determine the magnitude of
resultant moment of forces about the pivot O.

Ans. 40 N m (clockwise)
Fig. 1.30 shows two forces each of magnitude 10 N
acting at the points A and B at a separation of 50 cm,
in opposite directions. Calculate the resultant
moment of the two forces about the point (i) A, (ii) B
and (iii) O situated exactly at the middle of the two
forces.

F=10N B
e
fe}

A

F=10N
50 cm

Fig. 1.30
Ans. (i) 5 N m clockwise, (ii) 5 N m clockwise,
(iii) 5 N m clockwise

A steering wheel of diameter 0-5 m is rotated
anticlockwise by applying two forces each of
magnitude 5 N. Draw a diagram to show the
application of forces and calculate the moment of the
forces applied. Ans. 2-5 Nm
A uniform metre rule is pivoted at its mid-point. A
weight of 50 gf is suspended at one end of it. Where
should a weight of 100 gf be suspended to keep the
tule horizontal ?

Ans. At distance 25 cm from the other end.
A uniform metre rule balances horizontally on a knife
edge placed at the 58 cm mark when a weight of
20 gf is suspended from one end.

(i) Draw a diagram of the arrangement.
(ii) What is the weight of the rule ?
Ans. (ii) 105 gf

The diagram below (Fig. 1.31) shows a uniform bar
supported at the middle point O. A weight of 40 gf is
placed at a distance 40 cm to the left of the point O.
How can you balance the bar with a weight of
80 gf ?

40 of

50 40 30 20 10

Fig. 1.31
Ans. By placing the weight of 80 gf at a distance
20 cm to the right of the point O.
Fig. 1.32 shows a uniform metre rule placed on a
fulcrum at its mid-point O and having a weight 40 gf
at the 10 cm mark and a weight of 20 gf at the 90 cm
mark. (i) Is the metre rule in equilibrium ? If not, how

10 20 30 40 50 cm


===== PAGE 12 =====

40 gf 20 of
50 i
ioe 0 wad
o 10 20 30 40 60 70 80 90 100 cm

Fig. 1.32

will the rule turn ? (ii) How can the rule be brought in
equilibrium by using an additional weight of 40 gf ?

Ans. (i) No. The rule will turn anticlockwise

(ii) By placing the additional weight of

40 gf at the 70 cm mark.

When a boy weighing 20 kgf sits at one end of a 4 m

long see-saw, it gets depressed at this end. How can it

be brought to the horizontal position by a man

weighing 40 kgf.
Ans. By sitting of man at distance 1 m from the centre
on the side opposite to the boy.

12.

13. A physical balance has its arms of length 60 cm and
40 cm. What weight kept on pan of longer arm will
balance an object of weight 100 gf kept on other pan?

Ans. 66-67 gf

The diagram in Fig. 1.33 shows a uniform metre rule
weighing 100 gf, pivoted at its centre O. Two weights
150 gf and 250 gf hang from the points A and B of the
metre rule such that OA = 40 cm and OB = 20 cm.
Calculate : (i) the total anticlockwise moment about O,
(ii) the total clockwise moment about O, (iii) the
difference of anticlockwise and clockwise moments,
and (iv) the distance from O where a 100 gf weight
should be placed to balance the metre rule.

14,

Fig. 1.33

250 af

Ans. (i) 6000 gf cm, (ii) 5000 gf cm, (iii) 1000 gf cm,
(iv) 10 cm on the right side of O.

15. A uniform metre rule of weight 10 gf is pivoted at its

O mark.
(i) What moment of force depresses the rule ?

1.6 CEN

We have read in class IX that the gravitational
force is always attractive, so the earth attracts
every particle towards its centre by the force of
gravity on the particle (= weight w). A body can
be considered to be made up of a large number

(ii) How can it be made horizontal by applying 4
least force ?
Ans. (i) 500 gf cm (ii) By applying a force 5 gf
upwards at the 100 cm mark.
16. A uniform metre rule can be balanced at the 70-0 cm
mark when a mass 0-05 kg is hung from the 94-0 cm
mark.
(a) Draw a diagram of the arrangement.
(b) Find the mass of the metre rule.
Ans. (b) 0-06 kg
17. A uniform metre rule of mass 100 g is balanced on a
fulcrum at mark 40 cm by suspending an unknown
mass m at the mark 20 cm.
(i) Find the value of m.
(ii) To which side the rule will tilt if the mass m is
moved to the mark 10 cm ?
(iii) What is the resultant moment now ?
(iv) How can it be balanced by another mass of
50g?
Ans. (i) m = 50 g, (ii) on the side of mass m,
(iii) 500 gf x cm (anticlockwise),
(iv) by suspending the mass 50 g at the mark 50 cm.
18. In Fig. 1.34, a uniform bar of length / m is supported

at its ends and loaded by a weight W kgf at its middle.
In equilibrium, find the reactions R, and R, at the ends.

R, R,

W kof

Fig. 1.34
[Hint : In equilibrium R, + R, = W
l

7)

Ww Ww
Ans. R, = — kgf and R, = > kef
b+ 4. 22

l
and R, x 5 = R)x

of particles of weight w,, w5, w, ... . As the size
of the body is quite small in comparison to the
size of the earth, the force of gravity w acting on
these particles can be assumed to be parallel to
each other as shown in Fig. 1.35. All these
parallel forces acting in the same direction (ie.,


===== PAGE 13 =====

Fig. 1.35 Centre of gravity

vertically downwards towards the centre of earth)
can be replaced by a single resultant force of
magnitude equal to the sum of all these forces
i.e., equal to the entire weight W (= Ww, + Wy +
w;+ .... ) of the body. Now the question arises
where should this weight W act ? The weight W
is considered to act at a point G such that the
algebraic sum of moments due to weights w,, w>,

.. of each particle about the point G is zero. The
point G is called the centre of gravity of the body.
In other words, the body can be considered as a
point particle of weight W placed at its centre of
gravity G. Thus,

a
(a) The position of the centre of

Note :
gravity of a body of given mass depends on its
shape i.e., on the distribution of mass of
particles in it. It changes if the body is
deformed.

Example : The centre of gravity of a
uniform wire is at the middle of its length. But
if the same wire is bent into the form of a
circle, its centre of gravity will then be at the
centre of the circle.

(2) It is not necessary that the centre of
gravity always be within the material of the body.

Example : The centre of gravity of a ring
or a hollow sphere lies at its centre where
there is no material.

(3) By the concept of centre of gravity, a
body of weight W can be considered as a point
particle of weight W at its centre of gravity.

Centre of gravity of some ae ve

et Rod

ODE Circular disc
j ee Solid or hollow

pasecc 4

a cole

diagonals (Fig. 1:36). :

Fig 1.36 shows the emia: of centre of Rarely
by the point G for a circular ring, a circular disc,
a triangular lamina, a rectangle, a parallelogram, a
square lamina, a rod, and a cylinder.

O@A

CIRCULAR RING CIRCULAR DISC TRIANGULAR LAMINA

Ex] bx] bd

RECTANGLE PARALLELOGRAM SQUARE
e eerorsd
ROD CYLINDER

Fig. 1.36 Centre of gravity of some regular objects

Centre of gravity and the balance point

A solid body can be balanced by supporting
it at its centre of gravity. For example, a uniform
metre rule has its centre of gravity at the mark


===== PAGE 14 =====

50 cm. It can be balanced on a knife edge (or
finger tip) by keeping it exactly below the 50 cm
mark as shown in Fig. 1.37. It is possible because
the algebraic sum of moments of the weights of
all particles of rule about the knife edge (or finger
tip) is zero.

Metre rule
; Knife edge

Fig. 1.37 A metre rule supported on a knife edge
at its mid-point
Similarly, a square thin sheet (or lamina) can
be balanced on the tip of a nail as shown in
Fig. 1.38.

SQUARE LAMINA

Fig. 1.38 A square sheet balanced on the tip of a nail

If a body is freely suspended from a point, it
comes to rest (i.e. balances) in such a position
that its centre of gravity lies vertically below the
point of suspension. This fact can be used to

NAIL

locate the position of centre of gravity of an
irregular lamina.

Determination of centre of gravity of an irregular
lamina by the method of balance using a plumb
line

Let A be an irregular
lamina in Fig. 1.39, for
which the position of centre
of gravity is to be
determined. Make three fine
holes at a, b and c, near the
edge of the lamina. Now
suspend the given lamina
along with a plumb line
from the hole a, using a
pin (or a nail) clamped
horizontally on a retort stand. Check that the
lamina is free to oscillate on the nail about the
point of suspension. When lamina has come to
rest, draw a straight line ad along the plumb line.

Repeat the procedure by suspending the
lamina through the hole b and then through the
hole c for which we get straight lines be and cf
respectively. It is noticed that the lines ad, be and
cf intersect each other at a common point G
which is the position of centre of gravity of the
lamina.

Fig. 1.39 Centre of
gravity of lamina

1. Define the term ‘centre of gravity of a body’.
2. Can centre of gravity of a body be situated outside its
material ? Give an example.
Ans. Yes. e.g. C.G. of a ring
3. State factor on which the position of centre of gravity
of a body depend. Explain your answer with an
example.
4. What is the position of centre of gravity of a :
(a) rectangular lamina _(b) cylinder ?
Ans. (a) At the point of intersection of its diagonals.
(b) At the mid point on the axis of cylinder.

5. At which point is the centre of gravity situated in :
(a) a triangular lamina and
(b) a circular lamina ?
Ans. (a) At the point of intersection of its medians.
(b) At the centre of circular lamina.

6. Where is the centre of gravity of a uniform ring
situated ? Ans. At the centre of ring.

7. A square card board is suspended by passing a pin
through a narrow hole at its one corner. Draw a
diagram to show its rest position. In the diagram, mark
the point of suspension by the letter S and the centre
of gravity by the letter G.


===== PAGE 15 =====

8. Explain how you will determine experimentally the
position of centre of gravity for a triangular lamina
(or a triangular piece of card board).

9. State whether the following statements are true or false.
(i) ‘The position of centre of gravity of a body

remains unchanged even when the body is

deformed.’

‘The centre of gravity of a freely suspended body

always lies vertically below the point of

suspension’. Ans. (i) False (ii) True.

10. A uniform flat circular rim is balanced on a sharp

vertical nail by supporting it at a point A, as shown
in Fig. 1.40. Mark the position of centre of gravity of
the rim in the diagram by the letter G

(ii)

11. Fig. 1.41 shows three pieces of card board of uniform
thickness cut into three different shapes. On each
diagram draw two lines to indicate the position of
centre of gravity G.

ET Ze ©

Fig. 1.41

MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE
1. The centre of gravity of a uniform ball is :
(a) at its geometrical centre
(b) at its bottom
(c) at its topmost point
(d) at any point on its surface.
Ans. (a) at its geometrical centre
2. The centre of gravity of a hollow cone of height h is
at distance x from its vertex where the value of x is :
(a) h/3 (b) h/4

(c) 2A/3 (d) 3n/4 Ans. (c) 2A/3

1.7 UNIFORM CIRCULAR MOTION

When a particle moves with a constant speed
in a circular path, its motion is said to be the
uniform circular motion. In such a motion, the
particle travels equal distance along the circular
path in equal intervals of time, so the speed of
particle is uniform, but the direction of motion of
the particle changes at each point of circular path.
The continuous change in direction of motion
implies that the velocity of particle is non-uniform
(or variable) i.e., the motion is accelerated.

Direction of velocity at any instant in
circular path : Fig. 1.42 shows a particle moving
in a circular path in a horizontal plane with
uniform speed v in the anticlockwise direction.
The particle travels each quarter of circle AB, BC,
CD and DA in same interval of time t = 7/4
where T is the time taken by the particle in one
round of the circular path. Thus, the speed of

v a | NORTH
Cc A WEST
EAST
v D i SOUTH

Fig. 1.42 Direction of velocity in uniform circular motion

particle is constant (or uniform), but the direction
of motion of the particle is different at different
points of the circular path. At any point, the
direction of motion is along the tangent drawn at
that point of the circular path.

At the point A, the direction of motion of the
particle is towards north; after completing
quarter of circle, at the point B, the direction of
motion of particle is towards west; after
completing half circle, at the point C, the
direction of motion of particle is towards south
and after completing three-quarters of circle when


===== PAGE 16 =====

the particle is at the point D, its direction of
motion is towards east. Thus, the velocity of
particle in circular motion is variable or the
circular motion is accelerated even though the
speed of particle is uniform.

Difference between the uniform circular
motion and uniform linear motion : In uniform
linear motion, the speed and velocity are constant
and acceleration is zero i.e., the uniform linear
motion is an unaccelerated motion, while in a
uniform circular motion the velocity is variable
(although speed is uniform), so it is an
accelerated motion.

1. CENTRIPETAL AND CENTRIFUGAL
FORCE

Centripetal force : We have read that in a
linear motion, a force is needed to change the
direction of motion of a particle (or to change the
velocity of the particle) i.e., to produce
acceleration. In circular motion, at each point of
circular path, the particle continuously changes its
direction of motion. This change in direction of
motion can not be brought without a force. Thus,
the motion in circular path is possible only under
the influence of a force which is termed as the
centripetal force*. At each point of circular path,
this force is directed towards the centre of the
circle as shown in Fig. 1.43. Thus the direction
of acceleration also changes at each point of the
circular path, but its magnitude remains the
same i.e., the acceleration is variable (or non-
uniform). Hence for a body moving in a circular
path, a force is needed which acts as the
centripetal force.

D

Fig. 1.43 Direction of force in uniform circular motion.

* The word centripetal means centre seeking.

Examples :

(1) In an atom, an electron moves around the
nucleus in a circular path for which the
centripetal force is obtained from the
electrostatic force of attraction on the
negatively charged electrons by the
positively charged nucleus.

A planet moves around the sun in a circular
path for which the gravitational force of
attraction on the planet by the sun provides
the necessary centripetal force.

The moon moves around the earth in a
circular path for which the gravitational
force of attraction on the moon by the earth
provides the centripetal force.

When a stone tied at the end of a string is
whirled in a circular path, the tension in the
string holding the stone at the other end,
provides the centripetal force. If this force
is not present, the stone will not turn to
move in the circular path.

In all the above examples, the body moves in
a circular path with a uniform speed under the
influence of a centripetal force and it is in
dynamic equilibrium.

Centrifugal force : A force acting on a body
away from the centre of circular path is called
the centrifugal force. Thus centrifugal force is in
a direction opposite to the direction of centripetal
force. Its magnitude is same as that of the
centripetal force. But centrifugal force is not the
force of reaction of the centripetal force because
action and reaction do not act on the same body.
It is not the real force, but is a fictitious force
assumed by an observer moving in circular path
alongwith the body. To understand this force,
consider the following experiment.

Experiment : Fig. 1.44 shows‘ a ball tied at
one end of a string, the other end of which is tied
at the centre of a merry-go-round. Initially when
the platform of merry-go-round is stationary, the
ball is seen stationary and the string is loose. As
the platform starts rotating, the string becomes
tight due to tension T in it. The motion of ball

(2)

(3)

(4)


===== PAGE 17 =====

Man (on the ground)

Path of the tied ball
as seen by man at M

Merry-go-round

re
Fig. 1.44 A ball tied at the end of a string moving in
a circular path on a merry-go-round

is observed by two persons (i) standing outside
the merry-go-round on the ground at M, and
(ii) standing on the platform of merry-go-round
at A.

The person standing at M outside the merry-
go-round on the ground observes that the ball is
moving in a circular path (shown by dotted line),
while the person standing on the merry-go-round
at A observes that the ball is stationary placed just
in front of him at P. As the merry-go-round
rotates the position of person on the platform
changes from A to A’, A”, A”, and the ball
reaches at the position P’, P’’, P’’”’,
respectively, as if it remains at rest always just
in front of him. The different observations of the
same motion by the two persons at M and A are
explained as follows.

Explanation : For the person at M, the ball
moves in a circular path because the tension T in
the string provides the centripetal force needed
for the circular motion.

The person at A observes the ball stationary.
He considers following two forces to understand
his observation.

(i) the tension T in the string,towards the
centre of merry-go-round, and

(ii) the centrifugal force on the string away
from the centre.

The above two forces are equal and opposite,
therefore the net force on the ball is zero. Hence
it always remains stationary in front of him. Thus,
a person on the rotating platform can explain his
observation only by considering the centrifugal
force.

Case : If the string breaks when the ball is
in position P as shown in Fig. 1.45, the force of
tension T in string ceases to act. Now the person
at M standing on the ground will observe that
the ball is moving in a straight line along the
path PT (tangent drawn at the point P on the
circular path), while the person standing on
the merry-go-round will observe the ball at
positions P’, P’, P’’”’, ... when he will be at
positions A’, A”, A”, .... respectively i.e., he will
observe that the ball always remains in front of
him moving radially away from him as if a
centrifugal force acts on the ball away from
the centre. Thus the person in rotating frame
(merry-go-round) has to assume the presence of
the centrifugal force.

Man (on the ground)

Merry-go-round

= >
Fig. 1.45 Centrifugal force
Conclusion : The centrifugal force is not a

real force, it is a fictitious force. The only force
involved here is the force of tension in the string
acting towards the centre (i.e., the centripetal
force). A force which really does not exist, but
is considered to describe (or understand) a certain
motion, is called a fictitious force (or virtual
force).



===== PAGE 18 =====

De ee ec

13. A piece of stone tied at the end of a thread is whirled

1. Explain the meaning of uniform circular motion. Give
one example of such motion.

2. Draw a neat labelled diagram for a particle moving in
a circular path with a constant speed. In your diagram
show the direction of velocity at any instant.

3. Is it possible to have an accelerated motion with a
constant speed ? Name such type of motion.

Ans. Yes, uniform circular motion

4. Give an example of motion in which speed remains
uniform, but the velocity changes.

5. A uniform circular motion is an accelerated motion.
Explain it. State whether the acceleration is uniform
or variable ? Name the force responsible to cause this
acceleration. What is the direction of force at any
instant ? Draw diagram in support of your answer.

6. Differentiate between a uniform linear motion and a
uniform circular motion.

7. Name the force required for circular motion. State its
direction.

8. What is a centripetal force ?

9. Explain the motion of a planet around the sun in a
circular path.

10. (a) With reference to the direction of action, how
does a centripetal force differ from a centrifugal
force ?

(b) Is centrifugal force the force of reaction of
centripetal force ?
(c) Compare the magnitudes of centripetal and
centrifugal force.
Ans, (a) They act in opposite directions (b) No (c) 1: 1

ll. Is centrifugal force a real force ? Ans. No

12. A small pebble tied at one end of a string is placed

near the periphery of a circular disc at the centre of

which the other end of the string is tied. The disc is
rotating about an axis passing through its centre.

(a) What will be your observation when you are

standing outside the disc ? Explain.

(b) What will be your observation when you are

standing at the centre of the disc ? Explain.

Ans. (a) The pebble moves in a circular path because
the tension in the string provides the required
centripetal force. (b) The pebble is stationary just in
front because the centrifugal force on the pebble
balances the tension in string.

in a horizontal circle with uniform speed with the help
of hand. Answer the following questions :
(a) Is the velocity of stone uniform or variable ?
(b) Is the acceleration of stone uniform or variable?
(c) What is the direction of acceleration of stone at
any instant ?
(d) What force does provide the centripetal force
required for circular motion ?
(e) Name the force and its direction which acts on
the hand.

Ans. (a) variable (b) variable (c) towards the centre of the

circular path (d) tension in string (e) the reaction of
tension away from the centre of the circular path.

14. State two differences between the centripetal and

centrifugal force.

15. State whether the following statements are true or false

by writing T/F against them.

(a) The earth moves around the sun with a uniform
velocity.

(b) The motion of moon around the earth in circular
path is an accelerated motion.

(c) A uniform linear motion is unaccelerated, while
a uniform circular motion is an accelerated
motion.

(d) In a uniform circular motion, the speed
continuously changes because the direction of
motion changes. Ans. (a) F (b) T (c) T (d) F

MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE
1. Which of the following quantity remains constant in

a uniform circular motion :
(a) velocity (b) speed
(c) acceleration (d) both velocity and speed.
Ans. (b) speed
The centrifugal force is :
(a) a real force
(b) the force of reaction of centripetal force
(c) a fictitous force
(d) directed towards the centre of circular path
Ans. (c) a fictitous force

