

===== PAGE 1 =====

Refraction Through A Lens

SYLLABUS

Lenses (converging and diverging) including characteristics of the images formed (using ray diagrams only),
magnifying glass, location of images using ray diagrams and thereby determining magnification.

Scope of syllabus : Types of lenses (converging and diverging), convex and concave action of a lens as a set of
ptism, technical terms : centre of curvature, radius of curvature, principal axis, foci, focal plane and focal length,
detailed study of refraction of light in spherical lenses through ray diagrams, formation of images — principal
rays or construction rays, location of images from ray diagrams for various positions of a small linear object on
the principal axis, characteristics of images, sign convention and direct numerical problems using the lens formula -
are included (derivation of formula not required). Scale drawing or graphical representation of ray diagrams
not required. A
Power of a lens (concave and convex), simple direct numicrical problems. Magnifiying glass or simple microscope,
location of image and magnification from ray diagram only (formula and numerical problems not included).
Applications of lenses.

(A) LENS AND REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH A LENS

5.1 LENS A convex lens may be of the following three
kinds :
(i) bi-convex or double-convex or equi-convex,

We are all familiar with the use of lenses in

(ii) plano-convex, and
(iii) concavo-convex.

Fig. 5.1 shows the shape of different kind of
convex lenses.

A plane surface can be treated as a spherical
surface of infinite radius of curvature.

Kind of lenses : Lenses are of two kind :
(1) converging or convex lens, and
(2) diverging or concave lens.

BI-CONVEX PLANO-CONVEX CONCAVO-
CONVEX

Fig. 5.1 Convex lenses

1) Converging or convex lens ‘ :
@) ane A biconvex lens has both its surfaces convex,

_A convex lens is thick in its middle and 4 plano-convex lens has one surface plane and the
thin at the periphery. In other words, a lens which ther surface convex, while a concavo-convex
bulges out in the middle, is the convex lens. A jens has one surface convex and the other surface

light beam converges on passing through such a concave such that it is thicker in the middle as
lens, so it is also called the converging lens. compared to its periphery.


===== PAGE 2 =====

(2) Diverging or concave lens .

A concave lens is thick at its periphery
and thin in the middle. In other words, a lens
which is bent inwards in the middle, is the
concave lens. Such a lens diverges the light rays
incident on it, so it is also called the diverging
lens.

A concave lens may be of the following three
kinds :

(i) bi-concave or double-concave or equi-concave,

(ii) plano-concave, and

(iii) convexo-concave.

Fig. 5.2 shows the shape of different kind of

concave lenses.

PLANO-CONCAVE CONVEXO-

CONCAVE

BI-CONCAVE

Fig. 5.2 Concave lenses

A bi-concave lens has both its surfaces
concave, a plano-concave lens has one of its
surface plane and the other surface concave, while
a convexo-concave lens has one surface concave
and the other surface convex such that it is
thinner in the middle as compared to its periphery.

Note : Both the concavo-convex and the
convexo-concave lenses have one surface
convex and the other surface concave, but they
differ in their shape and action. A concavo-
convex lens is thicker in the middle and has a
converging action on a light beam, while a
convexo-concave lens is thinner in the middle
and has a diverging action on a light beam.

5.2 ACTION OF A LENS AS A SET OF
PRISMS

We have read the refraction of light through
a prism. The refraction of light through a lens can
be understood in a simple way by considering a
lens as being made up of a set of prisms as
shown in Fig. 5.3.

aes

YJ
U
U
Q

[EX

dU

(a) Convex lens (b) Concave lens

Fig. 5,3 A lens being made up of a set of prisms

To make it further simple, the prisms in the
central portion of the lens, shown in Fig. 5.3, may
be treated as a rectangular slab. Then the lens can
be considered as being made up of a rectangular
slab at the centre and one prism on either side
of it as shown in Fig. 5.4.

(a) Convex lens (b) Concave lens

Fig. 5.4 A lens being made up of a rectangular slab at the
centre and one prism on either side of it

A convex lens in its upper part has a prism
with its base downwards and in its lower part
has a prism with its base upwards as shown in
Fig. 5.4(a). On the other hand, a concave lens in
its upper part has a prism with its base upwards
and in its lower part has a prism with its base
downwards as shown in Fig. 5.4(b).

Convergent action of a convex lens

Let us consider the refraction of parallel rays
of light A, B and C incident on the prisms in the
upper, central and the lower parts of convex lens.
We know that a ray of light incident on a prism,
on refraction through it, always bends towards the
base of prism. Therefore the prism in the upper
part of convex lens bends the incident ray A
downwards, while the prism in the lower part of
convex lens bends the incident ray C upwards
(Fig. 5.5). The central part which is a parallel
sided glass slab passes the ray B normally
incident on it, undeviated. Thus the set of
prisms forming a convex lens converges the


===== PAGE 3 =====

parallel rays to a point K. ‘heretore a convex lens
has a converging action on the incident light
rays.

c

Fig. 5.5 Convergent action of a convex lens

Divergent action of a concave lens

In Fig. 5.6, the prism in the upper part of the
concave lens bends the incident ray A upwards
ie., towards its base, while the prism in the lower
part of the concave lens bends the incident ray
C downwards i.e., towards its base. The central
part, which is a parallel sided glass slab, passes
the normally incident ray B undeviated. Thus, the
set of prisms forming a concave lens diverges the
parallel rays as if they are coming from a
common point F situated on the side of rays
incident on the lens. Therefore, a concave lens
has a diverging action on the incident light rays.

(2)

Fig. 5.6 Divergent action of a concave lens

5.3. TECHNICAL TERMS RELATED TO A
LENS

(1) Centre of curvature : A lens has two
surfaces. Each surface of the lens is a part
of a sphere. The centre of the sphere whose
part is the. lens surface, is called the centre
of curvature of that surface of the lens. Since
a lens has two spherical surfaces, so there
are two centres of curvature of a lens.
In Fig. 5.7, C, and C, are respectively
the centres of curvature of the two surfaces
1 and 2 of the lens.

(3)

Note : For a convex lens, C, is to the right
of surface 1 and C, is to the left of surface 2,
while for a concave lens, C, is to the left of
surface 1 and C, is to the right of surface 2.

Sow Pi PS

(b) Concave lens
Fig. 5.7 Centre of curvature, principal

axis and optical centre

Radius of curvature : The radius of the
sphere whose part is the lens surface, is
called the radius of curvature of that surface
of the lens. In Fig. 5.7(a), PC, and PC, are
the radii of curvature of the two surfaces 1
and 2 of the convex lens. If the lens is thin,
then PC, = OC, and PC, = OC,. Similarly
in Fig. 5.7(b), P,|C, and P,C, are the radii of
curvature of the two surfaces 1 and 2 of
the concave lens. If the lens is thin, then
P,C, = OC, and P,C, = OC,. The point O is
called the optical centre. Thus for a thin lens,
the radius of curvature of a surface of lens
is equal to the distance of centre of curvature
of that surface from the optical centre. For
an equi-convex or equi-concave lens, the
radii of curvature of both the surfaces are
equal (i.e., OC, = OC,). The lenses shown
in Fig. 5.7 (a) and (b) are not equi-convex
and equi-concave since the radii of curvature
of the two surfaces OC, and OC, are not
equal. '

Principal axis : It is the line joining the
centres of curvature of the two surfaces of
the lens. In Fig. 5.7, the line C,C, is the
principal axis. It can extend on either side of
the lens.


===== PAGE 4 =====

(4) Optical centre : It is a point on the principal
axis of the lens such that a ray of light
passing through this point emerges parallel
to its direction of incidence. It is marked by
the letter O in Fig. 5.7. The optical centre is

thus the centre of lens.

Since the central portion of a thick lens can
be considered to be a parallel sided glass slab,
therefore a ray of light incident at the central
portion of the lens, while passing through the
optical centre O, is slightly displaced parallel to
its original direction. In Fig. 5.8, the emergent ray
is thus parallel to the incident ray.

(a) Convex lens

(b) Concave lens
Fig. 5.8 Optical centre (thick lens)

Note : In Fig 5.8, the lateral shift of the
ray has been shown quite large, but actually it
is very small.

Generally the lens is thin, so the lateral shift
is small enough and it can be ignored. Therefore,
a ray of light directed towards the optical centre
of a thin lens can be considered to pass
undeviated and undisplaced as shown in Fig. 5.9.

ho

(a) Convex lens (b) Concave lens
Fig. 5.9 Optical centre (thin lens)

Thus,

(5) Principal foci : A light ray can enter a lens
from either side, therefore, a lens has two
principal foci. If medium is same on either
side of the lens, the two foci are situated at
equal distances from the optical centre,
one on either side of the lens. These are
known as the first focal point (or first focus)
F, and the second focal point (or second
focus) F,.

First focal point

PRINCIPAL AXIS

4

(a) Convex lens

PRINCIPAL AXIS

+ f, —1

(b) Concave lens
Fig. 5.10 First focus and focal length



===== PAGE 5 =====

Second focal point

PRINCIPAL AXIS

— 1,1
(a) Convex lens

Pos

PRINCIPAL AXIS

¢— f, —1
(b) Concave lens
Fig. 5.11 Second focus and focal length

(6) Focal plane : A plane normal to the principal
axis, passing through the focus, is called the
focal plane. A lens has two focal planes.

(i) First focal plane : A plane passing
through the first focal point and normal
to the principal axis of the lens, is
called the first focal plane.

(ii) Second focal plane : A plane passing
through the second focal point and
normal to the principal axis of the lens,
is called the second focal plane.

(7) Focal length : he distance of focus (or focal
point) from the optical centre of lens, is
called its focal length. A lens has two focal
lengths.

(i) First focal length : The distance from
the optical centre O of the lens to its
first focal point F, is called the first
focal length f, of the lens. In Fig. 5.10,
it is shown as OF, = f;.

Second focal length : The distance

from the optical centre O of the lens to

the second focal point F, is called the
second focal length f, of the lens. In

Fig. 5.11, it is shown as OF, = f,.

Note : (1) If the medium on both sides of a
lens is same, its first and second focal lengths are
equal, i.e., f, = f, (numerically).

(2) Usually, when we say focus, we mean the
second focal point. Hence the focal length of a
lens implies the second focal length of the lens.

(3) A convex lens has a real focus (because
the parallel rays incident on a convex lens
actually pass through this point), while in a
concave lens the focus is virtual (because the
parallel rays incident on a concave lens do not
actually pass through this point, but they appear
to diverge from this point).

(4) Only a beam of light incident parallel to
the principal axis converges to a single point F,
(the focus) on the principal axis after refraction
through the convex lens. If the parallel beam of
light is incident obliquely (i.e., the rays are not
parallel to the principal axis of the lens), it does
not converge at the principal focus F,, but it

(ii)

Fig. 5.12 Refraction of an oblique parallel

beam by a convex lens


===== PAGE 6 =====

converges at some point B in the second focal
plane of the lens as shown in Fig. 5.12. The point
B lies on the second focal plane where the ray
AO, through the optical centre O of the lens,
meets the focal plane.

Similarly, if a parallel beam of light is incident
obliquely on a concave lens, after refraction it
appears to diverge from a point B in the second
focal plane as shown in Fig. 5.13.

FOCAL PLANE
Fig. 5.13 Refraction of an oblique parallel

beam by a concave lens

(5) The focal length of a lens depends on the
following two factors :

(i) The refractive index of the material of lens
relative to its surrounding medium. /f a
lens is placed in water instead of air, its
focal length increases.

(ii) The radii of curvature of the two surfaces
of lens. A thick lens has less focal length
than a thin lens of same material.

(6) If a part of the lens is covered, its focal
length remains unchanged, only the amount o
light entering the lens decreases due to which the
intensity of image decreases but the position, size
and nature of image formed by it do not change.

Difference between a convex and a concave lens

5.4 REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH
THE EQUI-CONVEX AND EQUI-
CONCAVE LENSES

Fig. 5.14 shows the refraction of a ray of light
at the two surfaces of an equi-convex lens and
an equi-concave lens. When a ray of light AB is
incident on a lens, its path changes because it
suffers refraction at two surfaces of the lens
marked as I and II in the diagram. First the light
ray AB suffers refraction at the first surface I
from air to glass, so it bends towards the normal
N,B at the point B. The refracted ray BC then
falls on the second surface II of the lens where
it now suffers refraction from glass to air, so it
bends away from the normal N,C at the point C
and emerges out as CD. Thus the ray of light
bends at both the surfaces of lens in the same
direction and hence the total deviation produced
by the lens is the sum of the deviations at the
two surfaces of lens.

(a) Convex lens (b) Concave lens

Fig. 5.14 Refraction through a lens

It is clear from Fig. 5.14, that a convex lens
bends the ray of light towards its middle i.e., it
converges the light, while a concave lens bends
a ray of light towards its edges (or away from its
middle) i.e., it diverges the light.

Note : For ray diagrams, we shall consider
the lens to be thin and for simplicity we shall
not show the bending of ray of light at each
of the two surfaces of lens separately, but we
shall show the net bending towards the central

part in a convex lens or away from the central
part in a concave lens, at the straight vertical
line passing through the optical centre.



===== PAGE 7 =====

1,

Ds

What is a lens ?

. Name the two kinds of lens. Draw diagrams to

illustrate them.

State difference between a convex and a concave
lens in their (a) appearence, and (b) action on the
incident light.

Which lens is converging : (i) an equiconcave lens
or an equiconvex lens. (ii) a concavo-convex lens or
a convexo-concave lens ?

Ans. (i) an equiconvex lens (ii) a concavo-convex lens

5.

6.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

Out of the two lenses, one concave and the other
convex, state which one will show the divergent
action on a light beam. Draw diagram to illustrate
you answer. Ans. Concave

Show by a diagram the refraction of two light rays
incident parallel to the principal axis on a convex
lens by treating it as a combination of a glass slab
and two triangular glass prisms.

Show by a diagram, the refraction of two light rays
incident parallel to the principal axis on a concave
lens by treating it as a combination of a glass slab
and two triangular glass prisms.

How does the action of a convex lens differ from
that of a concave lens on a parallel beam of light
incident on them ? Draw diagrams to illustrate your
answer.
Define the term principal axis of a lens.
Explain optical centre of a lens with the help of
proper diagram(s).
A ray of light incident at a point on the principal
axis of a convex lens passes undeviated through the
lens. (a) What special name is given to this point on
the principal axis ? (b) Draw a labelled diagram to
support your answer in part (a).
Ans. (a) Optical centre, (b) Fig. 5.9(a)
State the condition when a lens is called an equi-
convex or equi-concave.
Ans. When radii of curvature of the
two surfaces of lens are equal.
Define the term principal foci of a convex lens and
illustrate your answer with the aid of proper
diagrams.
Define the term principal foci of a concave lens and
show them with the help of proper diagrams.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.
22.

Draw a diagram to represent the second focus of a
concave lens.

Draw a diagram to represent the second focus of a
convex lens.

A ray of light, after refraction through a concave
lens emerges parallel to the principal axis. (a) Draw
a ray diagram to show the incident ray and its
corresponding emergent ray. (b) The incident ray
when produced meets the principal axis at a point F.
Name the point F.

Ans. (a) See Fig. 5.10 (b); (b) first focus.

A ray of light after refraction through a convex lens
emerges parallel to the principal axis. (a) Draw a ray
diagram to show it. (b) The incident ray passes
through a point F on the principal axis. Name the
point F.
Ans. (a) See Fig. 5.10 (a); (b) first focus.
A beam of light incident on a convex lens parallel to
its principal axis converges at a point F on the
principal axis. Name the point F. Draw a ray
diagram to show it.
Ans. Second focus, Fig. 5.11 (a)

A beam of light incident on a thin concave lens
parallel to its principal axis diverges and appears to
come from a point F on the principal axis. Name the
point F. Draw a ray diagram to show it.

Ans. Second focus, Fig. 5.11 (b)

Define the term focai length of a lens.
What do you mean by focal plane of a lens ?

State the condition for each of the following :
(a) a lens has both its focal lengths equal.
(b) a ray passes undeviated through the lens.
Ans. (a) medium is same on either side of lens,

(b) it is incident towards the optical centre of the lens.

24.

25.

A parallel oblique beam of light falls on a (i) convex
lens, (ii) concave lens. Draw a diagram in each case
to show the refraction of light through the lens.

The diagram
alongside shows a
lens as a
combination of a
glass slab and two
prisms.

(i) Name the lens formed

by the combination.

x

Fig. 5.15



===== PAGE 8 =====

26. The

(ii) What is the line XX’ called ?

(iii) Complete the ray diagram and show the path of
the incident ray AB after passing through the
lens.

(iv) The final emergent ray will either meet XX’ at
a point or appear to come from a point on XX’.
Label the point as F. What is this point called ?

diagram
alongside shows a
lens as a combination
of a glass slab and
two prisms.

(i) Name the lens
formed by the
combination.

(ii) What is the line XX’ called ?

(iii) Complete the path of the incident ray AB after
passing through the lens.

(iv) The final emergent ray either meets XX’ at a
point or appears to come from a point on XX’.
Label it as F. What is this point called ?

Fig. 5.16

27. In Fig. 5.17, F, and F, are the positions of the two

foci of the thin lenses shown in diagram (a) and (b).
Draw the path taken by the light ray AB after it
emerges from the lens in each diagram (a) and (b).

PRINCIPAL
AXIS

Fig. 5.17

28. In Fig. 5.18, F, and F, are the two foci of the thin
lenses shown in diagram (a) and (b) and AB is the
incident ray. Complete the diagram to show the path
of the ray AB after refraction through the lens in
each diagram (a) and (b).

PRINCIPAL AXIS

PRINCIPAL AXIS

(b)
Fig. 5.18

29. Complete the following sentences :

(a) If half part of a convex lens is covered, the focal
change, but the intensity

(c) The focal length of a thin convex lens is
. than that of a thick convex lens.
Ans. (a) does not, decreases (b) increase (c) more

MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE
1. Array of light after refraction through a lens emerges

parallel to the principal axis of the lens. The incident
tay passes through :

(a) its optical centre
(b) its first focus
(c) its second focus

(d) the centre of curvature of the first surface.
Ans. (b) its first focus

. A ray of light incident on a lens parallel to its

principal axis, after refraction passes through or
appears to come from :

(a) its first focus
(b) its optical centre
(c) its second focus

(d) the centre of curvation of its second surface.
Ans. (c) its second focus



===== PAGE 9 =====

(B) FORMATION OF IMAGEBYALENS =>

5.5 PRINCIPAL (OR CONSTRUCTION)
RAYS FOR RAY DIAGRAMS

The position, size and nature of the image of
an object formed by a lens, can be determined by
drawing a ray diagram. For this, we need to
consider at least two rays, as per convenience,
starting from a point on the object. The rays
chosen are those for which the path after
refraction from the lens is known to us.

Generally we use the following three principal
rays for the construction of the ray diagrams.

(1) A ray of light incident at the optical centre O
of the lens passes undeviated through the lens
as shown in Fig. 5.19 (a) and (b) respectively
for the convex and concave lens.

(a) Convex lens (b) Concave lens

Fig. 5.19 A ray through the opticenter passes undenated

(2) A ray of light incident parallel to the
principal axis of the lens, after refraction
passes through the second focus F, (in a
convex lens) or appears to come from the
second focus F, (in a concave lens) as shown
in Fig. 5.20 (a) and (b).

(a) Convex lens (b) Concave lens

Fig. 5.20 A ray incident parallel to principal axis either
Passes or appears to pass through the second focus
(3) A ray of light passing through the first focus
F, (in a convex lens) or directed towards the

first focus F, (in a concave lens), emerges
parallel to the principal axis after refraction
as shown in Fig. 5.21(a) and (b).

(a) Convex lens

(b) Concave lens

Fig. 5.21 A ray either incident from or directed towards first
focus becomes parallel to the principal axis

From a point of the object, although an
infinite number of rays travel in all possible
directions, but we choose only two convenient
rays out of the above mentioned three rays from
that point on the object. The point where the rays
meet (or appear to meet) after refraction from the
lens is the image of that point of the object. The
image is obtained in a similar manner for each
point of the object and all these image points
together then form the full image of the object.

Kind of images : The images can be of two
kind : (1) real, and (2) virtual.

(1) Real image : If the rays from a point of
object after refraction through the lens
actually meet at a point, the image is real. If
a screen is placed at this point, the image is
obtained on it (i.e., a real image can be
obtained on a screen).

(2) Virtual image : If the rays from a point of
object after refraction through the lens do not
actually meet at a point, but they appear to
diverge from a point, the image is virtual. A
screen placed at this point will not show any
image on it (i.e., a virtual image cannot be
obtained on a screen). However, the eye kept
between the diverging rays is able to see this
image because the eye lens being convex,
converges the diverging rays to form the
image on the retina of eye.

a= < 4
eee Le


===== PAGE 10 =====

Distinction between a real and a virtual image (3) Draw a straight line AB on the principal axis

5.6 CONSTRUCTION OF RAY DIAGRAM
FOR A LENS

A ray diagram to determine the position and

the characteristics of the image formed by a
convex lens is drawn following the steps given
below.

(1)

(2)

Draw a line PQ across the paper. Name it as
principal axis. Choose a point O on the
principal axis as the optical centre (Fig. 5.22).
Draw the convex lens and its principal section
by a vertical line passing through O. For a
thin lens, we shall show the light rays to bend
at this line, instead of bending them at the
two surfaces of lens.

V

Fig. 5.22

Choose a proper scale and mark two principal
foci F, and F, on the principal axis PQ
(Fig. 5.23). F, is on the left of O, while F,
is on the right of O at an equal distance i.e.,
OF, = OF,, since there is air on both sides
of the lens.

(4)

(5)

(6)

to represent the linear object, of given height
at the given position according to the scale
choosen (Fig. 5.24).

Fig. 5.24

Draw one ray of light AO from the top
point A of the object, passing straight
through the optical centre O of the lens
without any deviation (Fig. 5.25).

Fig. 5.25

Draw second ray of light AD from the same
top point A of the object, parallel to the
principal axis PQ up to the lens. After
refraction, this ray will pass through the
focus F, as DA’ (Fig. 5.26).

Fig. 5.26

For the second ray, the other choice can be
to drawn a ray AD’ from the top point A of
the object passing through the first focus F,
and then up to the lens. After refraction, this
ray becomes parallel to the principal axis PQ
as D’A’ (Fig. 5.27).

The point A’ where the two refracted rays
meet (or appear to meet) is the image of the


===== PAGE 11 =====

point A of the object. By drawing a
perpendicular A’B’ from A’ on the line PQ,
we get the image A’B’ of the object AB
(Fig. 5.28).

Fig. 5.28 Three construction rays in a convex lens

(7) Measure the height A’B’ and the distance OB’
of the image and then convert it on the
chosen scale to get the actual height and
position of the image.

The same procedure is adopted to draw the
ray diagram for a concave lens. In a concave lens,
the focus F, is on the right of optical centre O
and the focus F, is on its left. In Fig. 5.29, the
ray of light AO incident at the optical centre
passes undeviated as AOX, the ray of light AD
incident parallel to the principal axis will appear
to diverge as DY from F, after refraction and the
ray AD’ appearing to meet at the focus F, will
become parallel to the principal axis as D’Z after
refraction. The refracted rays when produced
backward, meet at A’. Thus A’ is the virtual
image of the point A of object. For the object AB,
the virtual image is A’B’.

Fig. 5.29 Three construction rays in a concave lens.

5.7 CHARACTERISTICS AND LOCATION
OF IMAGES FOR A CONVEX LENS

Now we shall consider the ray diagrams for
formation of images by a convex lens (focal
length = f) for different positions of the object.
Let u denotes the distance of object from the lens.

Case (i) : When the object is at infinity (7.e., u = 0)
In Fig. 5.30, the rays coming from an object at

infinity, are parallel to each other and they are incident
on the convex lens parallel to the principal axis of the
lens, which after refraction pass through the second
focus F, of the lens. Thus a real, inverted and
diminished (almost to a point) image is formed at the
focus on the other side of the lens.

Fig. 5.30 Image formation by a convex lens for
an object at infinity

If the object AB is at a far distance (u >> f) :
The light rays reaching the lens from a point of the
object will be parallel to each other, but will be incident
obliquely on the lens. In Fig. 5.31, the object AB is not
shown. The rays from the top point A of the object are
obliquely incident on the convex lens. The incident ray
passing through the optical centre O travels undeviated
through the lens, as OA’. Another ray from the same
point A of the object, incident on the lens through the
first focus F,, after refraction becomes parallel to the
principal axis as DA’. The two refracted rays OA’ and
DA’ meet at a point A’. Thus A’ is the real image of
the object point A which will lie in the focal plane of
the lens passing through the second focus F,. Similarly,
for the bottom point B of the object lying on the
principal axis, the image will be B’ at F,. Thus B’A’ is
the real, inverted and highly diminished image of the
object AB formed in the second focal plane.

Fig. 5.31 Image formation by a convex lens
for a very distant object

Characteristics and location of the image formed

The image is at the focus (or in the focal plane) on
the other side of the lens. It is

(a) real, (b) inverted, and (c) highly diminished.
Application : In this manner, a convex lens is used
either as a burning glass (Fig. 5.30) or a camera lens
(Fig. 5.31). To use the convex lens as a burning glass,
the rays of light from sun (at infinity) are brought to


===== PAGE 12 =====

focus on a piece of paper kept in the second focal plane
of the lens. Due to sufficient heat of sun rays, the paper
burns. In a camera, the object lies very far from the lens
and the image is formed at the camera film which is at
the second focus (or lies in the second focal plane) of
the lens.

Case (ii) : When the object is beyond 2F, (ée., u > 2f)

In Fig. 5.32, AB is an object placed on the principal
axis of a convex lens at a point beyond 2F,. From the
point A of the object, the ray AD incident parallel to
the principal axis, after refraction through the lens,
passes through the second focus F, as DA’. The other
ray AO incident at the optical centre O of the lens
travels undeviated as OA’. The two refracted rays DA’
and OA’ meet at a point A’. Thus A’ is the real image
of the point A of the object. Similarly B’ is the image
of the point B of the object. Thus A’B’ is the real,
inverted and diminished image of the object AB.

Fig. 5.32 Image formation by a convex lens for
the object beyond 2F,

Characteristics and location of the image formed

The image is between F, and 2F, on the other side
of the lens. It is

(a) real, (b) inverted, and (c) diminished.
Application : A convex lens is used in this manner as

a camera lens, when the object, not very far, is to be
photographed.
Case (iii) : When the object is at 2F, @e., u = 2f)

In Fig. 5.33, AB is an object placed on the principal
axis of a convex lens at a distance equal to twice the
focal length of the lens i.e., at 2F,. From the point A
of the object, the ray AD incident parallel to the
principal axis after refraction through the lens, passes
through its second focus F, as DA’. The other ray AO
incident through the optical centre O of the lens, travels
undeviated as OA’. The two refracted rays DA’ and OA’
meet at a point A’ which is the real image of the point
A of the object. Similarly for the point B of the object,
the image is at B’. Thus A’B’ is the real and inverted

image of the object AB. This image is of same size as
the object. .

Fig. 5.33 Image formation by a convex lens
for the object at 2F,

Characteristics and location of the image formed

The image is at 2F, on the other side of the lens.
It is (a) real, (b) inverted, and (c) of the same size as
the object.

Application : In this manner, a convex lens is used in
a terrestrial telescope for erecting the inverted image
formed by the objective lens.

Case (iv) : When the object is between F, and 2F,
(ie, f<u< 2f)

In Fig. 5.34, AB is an object placed on the principal
axis of a convex lens at a point between F, and 2F,.
From the point A of the object, a ray AD incident
parallel to the principal axis, after refraction from the
lens, passes through its second focus F, as DA’. The
other ray AO incident towards the optical centre O,
passes undeviated through the lens as OA’. The two
refracted rays DA’ and OA’ meet at a point A’ which
is the real image of the point A of the object. Similarly,
for the point B of the object, the image is at B’. Thus
A’B’ is the real, inverted and magnified image of the
object AB.

Fig. 5.34 Image formation by a convex lens for
the object between F and 2F,

Characteristics and location of the image formed

The image is beyond 2F, on the other side of the
lens. It is (a) real, (b) inverted, and (c) magnified.
Application : In this manner, a convex lens is used in
cinema and slide projectors. Here the magnified image
is obtained on a screen placed at a large distance on


===== PAGE 13 =====

the other side of tne rens. Care: Is Taken’ to ‘put wrersmue*

(or film i.e., illuminated object) in front of the lens just
beyond its focus in inverted position so as to obtain an
erect and magnified image on the screen.

Case (vy) : When the object is at F, (£e.,u =f)

In Fig. 5.35, AB is an object placed at the
focus F, on the principal axis of a convex lens. From
the point A of the object, a ray AD incident parallel to
the principal axis, after refraction from the lens, passes
through the second focus F, of the lens as DF,. The
other ray AO incident towards the optical centre O of
the lens, passes undeviated through it as OA’. The two
refracted rays DF, and OA’ being parallel to each other,
do not converge at a point at finite distance. For
point B, the image will be at B’ at infinity on the
principal axis.Thus a highly enlarged image A’B’ is
formed at infinity.

Fig. 5.35 Image formation by a convex lens
Sor the object at F,

Characteristics and location of the image formed

The image is at infinity ie., at a very far distance,

on the other side of the lens. It is (a) real, (b) inverted,
and (c) highly magnified.
Application : In this manner, a convex lens is used in
the collimator of a spectrometer to obtain a parallel
beam of light by placing the source of light at the focus
of convex lens.

Case (vi) : When the object is between the lens and
focus (i.e., between O and F, or u <f)

In Fig. 5.36, AB is an object placed on the principal
axis of a convex lens between its optical centre O and
the first focus F,. From point A of the object, a ray AD
incident parallel to the principal axis, after refraction
through the lens passes through the second focus F, as
DF,. The other ray AO incident at the optical centre O
of the lens, passes undeviated as OO’. The two refracted
rays DF, and OO’ do not meet each other, but they
appear to diverge from a point A’, ie., when they are

|

progucea DacKwaru,~unty meer wa point A’. Thus A’
is the virtual image of the point A of the object.
Similarly, for point B of the object, B’ is the virtual
image. Thus, A’B’ is the virtual, erect and magnified
image of the object AB which is formed on the same
side and behind the object. The image can be distinctly
seen by the eye by keeping it at the position shown in
Fig. 5.36 so that the eye lens converges the diverging
rays to form a real image on the retina of eye.

Fig. 5.36 Image formation by a convex lens for the object
between the optical centre and the focus

Characteristics and location of the image formed

The image is on the same side and behind
the object. It is (a) virtual, (b) erect or upright, and
(c) magnified.
Application : In this manner, a convex lens is used as
a reading lens (i.e., a magnifying glass or a simple
microscope) to form a magnified virtual image of a tiny
object (such as a small letter of a book or a small part
of a watch etc.).

Inference : From above, we notice that both
real as well as virtual images can be formed by
a convex lens depending upon the position of
object relative to the lens. The size of image
(magnified, diminished or same) also depends on
the position of object.

(1) When object is very far off from the convex
lens, a real, inverted and diminished image
is formed at the focus.

As the object moves towards the lens up to
2F, the image moves away from the focus of
the lens up to 2F. However, the image formed
will remain real, inverted and diminished, but
its size will gradually increase.

(2)


===== PAGE 14 =====

(3) As object comes at the position 2F, the image
is real, inverted and of the same size. It is
obtained at the position 2F on the other side
of the lens.

(4) On further moving the object from 2F
towards its focus F, the image will remain
real and inverted, but it becomes magnified
and is formed away from 2F on the other
side of the lens. When object comes at focus

F, the image moves to infinity.

On further moving the object from F towards
the lens i.e., if the object is brought between

(5)

5.8 CHARACTERISTICS AND LOCATION
OF IMAGES FOR A CONCAVE LENS

Let us now determine the position and
characteristics of the image formed by a concave
lens by ray diagrams for the different positions of
the object.

Case (i) : When the object is at infinity

The light rays from an object at infinity are parallel
to each other and in Fig. 5.37 they are incident parallel
to the principal axis of the concave lens, so after
refraction from the concave lens, they appear to diverge
from the second focus F,. Thus a virtual, erect and
diminished image is formed at the second focus on the
side of the object in front of the concave lens.

Fig. 5.37 Ray diagram for image formation by a
concave lens when the object is at infinity

Relative positions of the object and image in a convex lens

the focus and the lens, the image becomes
magnified, erect, and virtual: It is formed
behind the object.

Note : The above observations will
be same if the lens is moved towards the

object instead of moving the object towards the
lens.

The table below gives the position, size,
nature of the image formed by a convex lens and
its application corresponding to the different
positions of the object.

If the object is at a far distance on the principal
axis of a concave lens (which is not shown in the
diagram) : From the top point A of the object, rays
reaching the lens will be parallel to each other and they
will be obliquely incident on the lens. The ray PD
incident towards the first focus F, of the lens, after
refraction from the lens, becomes parallel to the
principal axis as DD’. The other ray QO from the same
point A of object, incident at the optical centre O of
the lens, passes undeviated through the lens as OO’.
The two refracted rays DD’ and OO’ do not meet each
other, but when produced backward, they meet at a point
A’ which is the virtual image of the point A of the
object. Similarly, for the bottom point B of the object

Fig. 5.38 Ray diagram for image formation by a concave
lens when the object is at a very large distance

Sa aes


===== PAGE 15 =====

lying on the principal axis, the virtual image is formed
at B’ at the second focus F, of the lens. Thus A’B’ is
the virtual, erect (or upright) and highly diminished
image of the object AB which is formed in the focal
plane at second focus F, of the lens.

Characteristics and location of the image

The image is at the second focus F, (or in the focal
plane at F,) on the side of the object. It is

(a) virtual, (b) erect, and (c) highly diminished.

Application : A concave lens is used in Galilean
telescope in this manner.
Case (ii) : When the object is at any finite distance
from the concave lens

Let AB be an upright object placed at a point on
the principal axis at any finite distance, in front of a
concave lens (Fig. 5.39). Two rays AD and AO from
the point A of the object, after refraction through the
lens, diverge from each other. The ray AD incident
parallel to the principal axis is refracted as DD’ so as
to appear to come from the second focus F,. The ray
AO, incident towards the optical centre O, passes
undeviated after refraction as OO’. The two refracted
rays DD’ and OO’ do not meet at any point. But the

D’

Fig. 5.39 Ray diagram for image formation by
a concave lens when the object is between
infinity and the lens

Relative positions of the object

of the lens as the object.

Between the focus and optical
centre, on the same side of

refracted ray DD’, on being produced backward, meets
the ray AO at a point A' which is the virtual image of
the point A. Similarly B’ is the virtual image of the
point B. Thus A’B’ is the virtual, erect and diminished
image of the object AB formed between the optical
centre and second focus of the lens.

Characteristics and location of the image

The image is between the lens and focus, on the
side of object. It is (a) virtual, (b) erect, and
(c) diminished.
Application : A concave lens is used in spectacles for
the short-sighted persons in this manner.

Inference : From above, we notice that
irrespective of the position of the object, the
image formed by a thin concave (or divergent)
lens is always virtual, upright, diminished, and it
is situated on the side of the object between the
focus and the lens.

(1) When the object moves from a large distance
towards the lens, the image shifts from focus
towards the optical centre of the lens and the
size gradually increases, but it always remains
smaller than the object.

When the object is at a distance equal to the
focal length of the lens, the image is exactly
at the mid-point between the optical centre
and the second focus of the lens.

(2)

The table below gives the position, size,
nature of the image formed by a concave lens and
its application corresponding to the different
positions of the object.

and image in a concave lens

the lens as the object.


===== PAGE 16 =====

5.9 DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE IMAGE FORMED BY A CONVEX AND A CONCAVE
LENS

Image by a convex lens _

i WH io tarda nk aT oe 1. The image is always virtual for all positions of object.
object lies beyond the focus, while it is virtual if the

object lies before the focus. > yee

a aes bl gated SALI as 2. The image is always diminished.

diminished. It is magnified if the object lies before 2F,

iene sae itt otpecy ts Gh OE) SE ee

object is beyond 2F.

. The image gan,bo inyexted.ta sella aaa etiane 3. The image is always erect.
is inverted if the object is beyond focus, and erect if the
object is before the focus.

1. Fig 5.40 (a) and (b) show the refracted ray BC Complete each diagram by draning the incident
through a convex and concave lens respectively ray if F, and F, are in the principal foci of the
and their foci marked as F, and F,. Complete the lens.

diagram by drawing each corresponding incident

(a) Convex (b) Concave

(a) Convex (b) Concave

Fig. 5.40

Fig. 5.42

In Fig. 5.42, the refracted ray BC passes through the
Fig. 5.40 (a) and (b) show the refracted ray BC parallel | second focus F, in the convex lens and appear to be
to the principal axis. Therefore, the incident ray must be | coming from F, in the concave lens, so the incident ray
coming from first focus F, in convex lens and must be | must be parallel to the principal axis. For this, a line BA
travelling towards the first focus F, in the concave lens. | ig drwn from the point B parallel to the principal axis in
Thus, to find the incident ray, F, is joined to the starting | each case so that AB is the incident ray. The completed
point B of the refracted ray and then produced backward | diagram is shown in Fig. 5.43 (a) and (b).
as BA. Then AB is the required incident ray. The
completed diagram is shown is Fig. 5.41(a) and (b).

(a) Convex (b) Concave

(a) Convex (b) Concave Fig. 5.43

Fig. 5.41 3. The diagram ahead shows an object AB placed
on the principal axis of a lens L . The two foci of
the lens are F, and F,. The image formed by the
lens is erect, virtual and diminished.

2. Fig 5.42(a) and (b) show the refracted ray BC
through a convex and concave lens respectively.


===== PAGE 17 =====

Fig. 5.44

(i) Draw the outline of the lens L used and
name it.

(ii) Draw a ray of light starting from B and
passing through O. Show the same ray after
refraction by the lens.

(iii) Draw another ray from B which is incident
parallel to the principal axis and show how
does it emerge after refraction from the lens.

(iv) Locate the final image formed.

(i) Since the image formed by the lens is erect,
virtual and diminished, the lens is concave.
The outline of the lens L is shown in Fig. 5.45.

CONCAVE LENS
Fig. 5.45

(ii) The light ray BO is incident at the optical
centre O of the lens, it passes undeviated as
OC after refraction through the lens.

(iii) The light ray BP is incident parallel to the
principal axis. It emerges as PQ after

1, What are the three principal rays that are drawn to
construct the ray diagram for the image formed by
a lens ? Draw diagrams to support your answer.

2. In the diagrams below, XX’ represents the principal
axis, O the optical centre and F the focus of the lens.
Complete the path of the rays A and B as they
emerge out of the lens.

Fig. 5.47

refraction which appears to diverge from the
second focus F, of the lens.

(iv) The refracted rays OC and PQ do not actually
meet, but they appear to diverge from a point
B' (i.e., they meet at a point B’ when they are
produced backwards). Thus B’ is the virtual
image of the point B. The complete image
A'B' is obtained by drawing perpendicular
from B’ on the line F,OF,. The image is
formed between the optical centre O and focus
F, of the lens.

The completed ray diagram is shown in Fig. 5.45.

4. Is it possible to burn a piece of paper using a

convex lens in day light without using the match-
box or any direct flame ? Draw a diagram to
support your answer.

Yes, it is possible by converging the light rays
coming from sun on the piece of paper placed in the
focal plane of the convex lens. The ray diagram is _
shown in Fig. 5.46.

g

J

on
CONVEX
LENS

F.

C4 PAPER
Fig. 5.46

Note : Oblique parallel rays can also be made
incident on the convex lens as shown in Fig. 5.12.

3. Distinguish between a real and a virtual image.
4. Study the diagram (Fig. 5.48) given below.
t

u
Fig. 5.48

(a) Name the lens LL’.

(b) What are the points O and O’ called ?

(c) Complete the diagram to form the image of the
object AB.


===== PAGE 18 =====

(d) State the three characteristics of the image.

(e) Name a device in which this action of lens is

used.

5. Study the diagram (Fig. 5.49) below.
L

Fig. 5.49 ov

(i) Name the lens LL’.
(ii) What are the points O, O’ called ?

(iii) Complete the diagram to form the image of the

object AB.
(iv) State three characteristics of the image.

6. The diagram in Fig. 5.50 shows an object AB and a
converging lens L with foci F, and F,.

(a) Draw two rays from the object AB and complete

the diagram to locate the position of image CD.

Also mark on the diagram the position of eye

from where the image can be viewed.

Fig. 5.50

(b) State three characteristics of the image in

relation to the object.

7. The diagram in Fig. 5.51 shows the position of an
object OA in relation to a converging lens L whose

foci are at F, and F,.

Fig. 5.51

(i) Draw two rays to locate the position of

image.

10.

11.

14.

17.

18.

(ii) State the position of image with reference to
the lens.

(iii) Describe three characteristics of the image.

(iv) Describe how the distance of image from the
lens and its size change as the object is moved
towards F,.

A converging lens forms the image of an object
placed in front of it, beyond 2F, of the lens.
(a) Where is the object placed ? (b) Draw a ray
diagram to show the formation of image. (c) State
three characteristics of the image.

A convex lens forms an image of an object equal
to the size of the object. (a) Where is the object
placed in front of the lens ? (b) Draw a diagram to
illustrate it. (c) State two more characterstics of the
image.

A lens forms an erect, magnified, and virtual image
of an object. (a) Name the kind of lens. (b) Where
is the object placed in relation to the lens ? (c) Draw
a ray diagram to show the formation of image.
(d) Name the device which uses this principle.

A lens always forms an image between the
object and the lens. (a) Name the lens. (b) Draw a
ray diagram to shown the formation of such image.
(c) State three characteristics of the image.

Where must a point source of light be placed in
front of a convex lens so as to obtain a parallel
beam of light ? Ans. At focus
Classify as real or virtual, the image of a candle
flame formed on a screen by a convex lens. Draw a
ray diagram to illustrate how the image is formed.

Show by a ray diagram that a diverging lens cannot
form a real image of an object placed anywhere on
its principal axis.

Draw a ray diagram to show how a converging lens
can form a real and enlarged image of an object.
Where will the image be formed if an object is kept
in front of a concave lens at a distance equal to its
focal length ? Draw a ray diagram to illustrate your
answer.

Draw a ray diagram to show how a converging lens
is used as a magnifying glass to observe a small
object. Mark on your diagram the foci of the lens
and the position of the eye.

Draw a ray diagram to show how a converging lens
can form an image of the sun. Hence give a reason
for the term 'burning glass' for a converging lens
used in this manner.


===== PAGE 19 =====

19. A lens forms an inverted image of an object. *

(a) Name the kind of lens.

(b) State the nature of image whether real or
virtual ? Ans. (a) Convex (b) real

A lens forms an upright and magnified image of an

object.

(a) Name the lens.

(b) Draw a labelled ray diagram to show the image
formation.

20.

21. Name the lens which always forms an erect and
virtual image.
State whether the image in part (a) is magnified
or diminished.
Ans. (a) Concave, (b) diminished
Can a concave lens form an image of size two times
that of the object ? Give reason.
Ans. No. Reason : A concave lens diverges the rays
incident on it, and the image is always diminished.

(a)

(b)

22.

23. Give two characteristics of the image formed by a
concave lens. Ans. Virtual, diminished

Give two characteristics of the virtual image formed
by a convex lens. Ans. Erect, magnified
In each of the following cases, where must an object
be placed in front of a convex lens so that the image
formed is
(a) at infinity,
(b) of same size as the object,
(c) inverted and enlarged,
(d) upright and enlarged ?

Ans. (a) at focus, (b) at 2F, (c) between F and 2F

(d) between optical centre and focus.

24.

25.

Complete the following table :

- State the changes in the position, size and nature of
the image when the object is brought from infinity
up to the convex lens. Illustrate your answer by
drawing the ray diagrams.

. State the changes in the position, size and nature of
the image when the object is brought from infinity

up to the concave lens. Illustrate your answer by

drawing the ray diagrams.

29. Complete the following sentences :

(a) An object is placed at a distance of more than
40 cm from a convex lens of focal length 20 cm.
The image formed is real, inverted and......

(b) An object is placed at a distance 2f from a
convex lens of focal length f. The size of image
formed is ........0000 that of the object.

(c) An object is placed at a distance 5 cm from a
convex lens of focal length 10 cm. The image
formed is virtual, upright and ...........

Ans. (a) diminished (b) equal to (or same as)
(c) magnified

30. State whether the following statements are ‘true’ or

‘false’ by writing T/F against them.

(a) A convex lens has a divergent action and a
concave lens has a convergent action.

(b) A concave lens, if kept at a proper distance from
an object, can form its real image.

(c) A ray of light incident parallel to the principal
axis of a lens, passes undeviated after refraction.

(d) A ray of light incident at the optical centre of
lens, passes undeviated after refraction.

(e) A concave lens forms a magnified or diminished
image depending on the distance of object from
it. Ans. (a) F (b) F (c) F (d) T (e) F

MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE
1. For an object placed at a distance 20 cm in front of
a convex lens, the image is at a distance 20 cm
behind the lens. The focal length of convex lens is:
(a) 20 cm (b) 10 cm (c) 15 cm (d) 40 cm.
Ans. (b) 10 cm
2. For the object placed between the optical centre and
focus of a convex lens, the image is :
(a) real and enlarged
(b) real and diminished
(c) virtual and enlarged
(d) virtual and diminished.
Ans. (c) virtual and enlarged
A concave lens forms the image of an object which
is :
(a) virtual, inverted, and diminished
(b) virtual, upright, and diminished
(c) virtual, inverted, and enlarged
(d) virtual, upright, and enlarged.
Ans. (b) virtual, upright, and diminished.

3.



===== PAGE 20 =====

(C) SIGN CONVENTION AND LENS FORMULA

5.10 SIGN CONVENTION OF MEASUREMENT
OF DISTANCES ;
We follow the cartesian sign convention to
measure the distances in a lens according to which:
(1) The optical centre of the lens is chosen as
the origin of coordinate system.
The object is considered placed on the left
of the lens (it makes the sign of distances
measured identical to the sign of distances
in cartesian coordinate system).
All the distances are measured along the
principal axis from the optical centre of
the lens. The distance of an object from
the lens is denoted by u, the distance of
image by v and the distance of second
focus (i.e., focal length of lens) by f.
The distances measured in the direction of
incident ray are taken positive, while the
distances opposite to the direction of
incident ray are taken negative.

(2)

(3)

(4)

INCIDENT

LIGHT t POSITIVE

OBJECT

—~- POSITIVE,

F,
Via aehiie
—+

DIECTION OF
INCIDENT LIGHT

<— NEGATIVE

aaa
DIRECTION
OPPOSITE TO
INCIDENT LIGHT

(a) Convex lens

OBJECT INCIDENT frosmve
LIGHT

—» POSITIVE
%

F, F.

1
<— NEGATIVE | NEGATIVE
+—_ —>
DIRECTION DIECTION OF
OPPOSITE TO INCIDENT LIGHT

INCIDENT LIGHT
(b) Concave lens

Fig. 5.52 Sign convention

(5) The length above the principal axis is
taken positive, while the length below the
principal axis is taken negative.

(6) Fig. 5.52 shows the distances for the
convex and concave lens according to the
sign convention. By sign convention, the
focal length (= OF) of the convex lens is
positive and that of concave lens is
negative. The distance of object (uw) in
front of lens is always negative. The
distance of image (v) is positive if it is
real and formed behind the lens, while it
is negative if the image is virtual and
formed in front of the lens.

5.11 LENS FORMULA 2 - 1 = 3

The equation relating the distance of object (uw),
distance of image (v) and focal length (/) of a lens
is called the lens formula. It is same for both the

convex and concave lens and is given as

(5.1)

Derivation® : Fig 5.53 (a) and (b) shows the
formation of image A,B, of a linear object AB
by a convex and concave lens respectively.

1 -) u —— (4) F1 ‘A,
————__ (+) v—_————

(a) Convex lens

ie--()f--
M----- C)u----- >»
(b) Concave lens

Fig. 5.53 Lens formula

* Derivation is not included in the syllabus.


===== PAGE 21 =====

In Fig. 5.53, the triangles AOB and A,OB,
are identical

BA _ OB
BA, = OB, w-(1)
Similarly A DOF, and A A,B,F, are identical
OD OF;
BA, ~ EB,
But BA = OD
pe 2
BA, = BB, wee(ii)

From egns. (i) and (ii),
OB _ OF,
OB, ~ EB,

vwns(iii)

(a) For convex lens : In Fig. 5.53(a), by sign
convention, distance of object from the
optical centre OB = u (negative), focal
length of lens OF, = f (positive),
distance of image from the optical centre
OB, = v (positive), and

F,B, = OB, - OF, = v — f (positive)

From eqn. (iii),

-u_ if

pe = Weg,
or —-uv+uf=vf
or uf — vf = uv

Dividing both sides by uvf,

x
ig ap

we (iV)

=|-

v
(b) For concave lens : In Fig. 5.53(b), by

sign convention, OB = u (negative),
OF, = f (negative), OB, = v (negative),
and F,B, = OF, — OB,
=f — v (negative)
Substituting these values in eqn. (iii),

-f a i
-(f-vy fy = fav

-u

av

or uf — uv = vf
or uf — vf = uv
Dividing both sides by wf,

1 1 1
ea, we(V)
From eqns. (iv) and (v), it is clear that the
expressions are same for both the convex and
concave lens.

Note : In numericals, the known values are
substituted with their proper sign and then
the unknown quantity is obtained with its
proper sign. According to sign convention
for a convex lens u is always negative, f is

always positive, v is positive for the real image
and v is negative for the virtual image. But
for a concave lens u, v and f all are negative
and the numerical value of u is always greater
than v.

5.12 LINEAR MAGNIFICATION

It is not sufficient to know the postion
of image of an object by a lens, but it is
also required to know its size. When the position
of object changes, the position as well as the
size of image change. The ratio of length of
image I perpendicular to the principal axis, to the
length of object O, is called the linear
magnification. It is generally denoted by the letter
m and is related to the distance of image (v) and
distance of object (u) for both the convex and
concave lens as :

(5.2)

*Derivation : Fig. 5.54 (a) and (b) shows the
formation of image A,B, of an object AB by the
convex and concave lens respectively.

* Drivation is not included in the syllabus


===== PAGE 22 =====

(b) Concave lens
Fig. 5.54 Magnification

In Fig. 5.54, AABO and AA,B,O are similar
triangles

BA, _ OB, i
BA ~ OB w(i)
(a) For convex lens : In Fig. 5.54(a), by

sign convention, B,A, = I (negative),
BA = O (positive), OB, = v (positive) and
OB = u (negative).
From eqn. (i),
oi
oO

I v ies
In Fig. 5.54 (b), by
sign convention, B,A, = I (positive),
BA = O (positive), OB, = v (negative)
and OB = u (negative),

v
=ast OF
—-Uu

From eqn. (i),
I -v I v ren
Gi aa or as w.- (ili)

From eqns. (ii) and (iii), it is clear that the
expressions for magnification are same for both
the convex and concave lens.

Note : (1) For the real image (which is
inverted), the magnification m is negative,
while for the virtual image (which is erect), the
magnification m is positive. Thus a convex
lens can have the value of m positive as well

as negative, but a concave lens always has the
value of m positive.

(2) The numerical value of m is greater
than 1 if image is magnified, is 1 for image
of size same as of the object and is less
than 1 for the diminished image. Thus the
numerical value of m is always less than 1 for
a concave lens, while it can be greater than,
equal to or less than 1 for a convex lens
depending on the position of the object.

5.13 POWER OF A LENS

When a beam of light passes through a lens,
it gets deviated from its path. The deviation
produced by the lens is expressed in terms of its
power. A lens which produces more deviation has
more power. Thus,

A thick lens i.e., a lens (having surfaces of
more curvature) is of short focal length and it
deviates the rays more, while a thin lens (i.e, a
lens having surfaces of less curvature) is of large
focal length and it deviates the rays less. Hence
power of a lens is expressed (or measured) in
terms of the reciprocal of focal length. Its unit is
dioptre (symbol D). Thus

While giving prescription to a patient, an
optician does not quote the focal length of lens,
but he quotes the power of lens. A lens is of
power 1 dioptre (or 1 D), if its focal length is
1 m (or 100 cm).

Depending on the direction in which a lens
deviates the light ray, its power is either positive
or negative. If a lens deviates a ray towards its
centre, the power is positive and if it deviates the
ray away from its centre, the power is negative.
Therefore the power of a convex lens is positive
and of a concave lens is negative. Thus power of
a convex lens of focal length 20 cm is + 5-0 D



===== PAGE 23 =====

while that of a concave lens of same focal length
is — 5-0 D.

If two thin lenses are placed in contact, the
combination has a power equal to the algebraic
sum of the powers of the individual lens. If a

convex lens of power + 2:0 D is kept in contact
with a concave lens of power — 2-0 D, the
combination will have zero power and it will
behave like a glass plate.

1. An object of height 4-0 cm is placed at a distance
24 cm in front of a convex lens of focal length
8 cm. (a) Find the position and size of the image.
(b) State the characteristics of the image.

Given : O = 4-0 cm, u = 24 cm (negative),
f= 8 cm (positive)

<I
i}

S|
+

s+

F lati Bere
(a) rom relation | — 7 =F

Bl-

<|—
00 | =

or — = 2 +
—24

or v=12cm

The image is at distance 12 cm behind the lens.

I 12

. I
From relation > 40 > La

aoe
Ou

or 1=-2 x4=-2cm

Thus the image is inverted of size 2 cm.
Characteristics of the image : The image is
real, inverted and diminsihed (size 2-0 cm).

2. The focal length of a camera lens is 20 cm. Find
how far away from the film must the lens be set
in order to photograph an object located at a
distance 100 cm from the lens.

Given : f = 20 cm (positive), u = 100 cm (negative)

(b)

Fc wigs HY Ph hy Bw
rom relation >- 7 =, [= yt 7

oy = Z100 * 20 = 25

or v=25cm
Thus the lens must be set at a distance 25 cm from
the film towards the object.

3. A convex lens forms an image 16-0 cm long of an
object 4-0 cm long kept at a distance 6 cm from
the lens. The object and the image are on the
same side of lens.

(a) What is the nature of image ?
(b) Find : (i) the position of image, and (ii) the
focal length of lens.
(a) Since the image is magnified and on same side of
the lens as the object, so the image is virtual.
(b) Given : I = 16-0 cm (positive), O = 4:0 cm
(positive), u = 6 cm (negative)

v 16:

et

o

z A I v
(i) From relation, m = a= me

or v=-24cm

Thus the image is at distance 24 cm in front of

lens.
i ee eee
(ii) From realtion — - — =
v u

1 1

fi > 94.7

or f=8cm
Thus the focal length of lens = 8 cm.

1. State the sign convention to measure the distances
for a lens.

2. The focal length of a lens is (i) positive, (ii) negative.
In each case, state the kind of lens.

Ans. (i) convex (ii) concave
| ais

3. Write the lens formula explaining the meaning of the
symbols used.

4. What do you understand by the term magnification ?
Write expression for it for a lens, explaining the

meaning of the symbols used.
==


===== PAGE 24 =====

8.

10.

What information about the nature of image (i) real
or virtual, (ii) erect or inverted, do you get from the
sign of magnification + or — ?

Ans. + sign : virtual and erect

and — sign : real and inverted

Define the term power of a lens. In what unit is it
expressed ?
How is the power of a lens related to its focal length ?
How does the power of a lens change if its focal
length is doubled ? Ans. Power gets halved.
How is the sign (+ or —) of power of a lens related to
its divergent or convergent action ?
The power of a lens is negative. State whether it is
convex or concave ? Ans. concave

MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE

1.

If the magnification produced by a lens is — 0-5,
the correct statement is :
(a) the lens is concave
(b) the image is virtual
(c) the image is magnified
(d) the image is real and diminshed formed by a convex
lens
Ans. (d) the image is real and diminshed formed
by a convex lens

. The correct lens formula is

1 1 1 1 1 1
ene ye PP ga es
1 1 1
Oss: Ole

1

|
Aeled =ig j

. On reducing the focal length of a lens, its power :

(a) decreases
(b) increases
(c) does not change
(d) first increases then decreases.
Ans. (b) increases

. The lens of power + 1-0 D is :

(a) convex of focal length 1-0 cm
(b) convex of focal length 1-0 m
(c) concave of focal length 1-0 cm

(d) concave of focal length 1-0 m.
Ans. (b) convex of focal length 1-0 m

1.

8.

10.

11.

NUMERICALS

(a) At what position a candle of length 3 cm be
placed in front of a convex lens so that its image
of length 6 cm be obtained on a screen placed
at distance 30 cm behind the lens ?

(b) What is the focal length of lens in part (a) ?

Ans. (a) 15 cm, (b) 10 cm

A concave lens forms the image of an object kept at

a distance 20 cm in front of it, at a distance 10 cm

on the side of the object. (a) What is the nature of

the image ? (b) Find the focal length of the lens.

Ans. (a) virtual, erect, diminshed (b) 20 cm (negative)

The focal length of a convex lens is 25 cm. At what
distance from the optical centre of the lens an object
be placed to obtain a virtual image of twice the
size ? Ans. 12-5 cm in front of the lens
Where should an object be placed in front of a
convex lens of focal length 0-12 m to obtain a real
image of size three times the size of the object, on
the screen ? Ans. 0-16 m in front of lens
An illuminated object lies at a distance 1-0 m from
a screen. A convex lens is used to form the image
of object on a screen placed at distance 75 cm
from the lens. Find : (i) the focal length of lens,
and (ii) the magnfication. Ans. (i) 18-75 cm (ii) — 3
A lens forms the image of an object placed at
a distance 15 cm from it, at a distance 60 cm in
front of it. Find : (i) the focal length, (ii) the
magnification, and (iii) the nature of image.
Ans. (i) 20 cm (ii) + 4
(iii) erect, virtual and magnified
A lens forms the image of an object placed at a
distance of 45 cm from it on a screen placed at a
distance 90 cm on other side of it. (a) Name the
kind of lens. (b) Find : (i) the focal length of lens,
and (ii) the magnification of image.
Ans. (a) convex (b) (i) 30 cm (ii) — 2
An object is placed at a distance of 20 cm in front
of a concave lens of focal length 20 cm. Find :
(a) the position of image, and (b) the magnification
of image. Ans. (a) 10 cm in front of lens, (b) + 0-5
The power of a lens is + 2-0 D. Find its focal length
and state the kind of the lens.
Ans. 50 cm, convex

Express the power (with sign) of a concave lens of
focal length 20 cm. Ans.—5 D

The focal length of a convex lens is 25 cm. Express
its power with sign. Ans. + 4.0 D


===== PAGE 25 =====

_____ (©) MAGNIFYING GLASS AND

5.14 MAGNIFYING GLASS OR SIMPLE
MICROSCOPE

Principle : To observe a tiny object distinctly,
we prefer to place it as near to our eye as
possible, but to see an object by the naked eye,
it is necessary to place it at least at a distance
of 25 cm from the eye which is the least
distance of distinct vision (D) for a normal eye.
Thus an object is seen distinctly and of maximum
size when it is placed at a distance D from the
eye.

The size of image on retina is actually
deternined by the angle subtended by the object
at the eye. Smaller the angle subtended by the
object at the eye, smaller is the size of image on
the retina. The eye is not able to see an object

distinctly if it subtends an angle less than 1’

= 5°) at it. To observe a small object which

subtends an angle smaller than 1’ at the eye when
placed at the least distance of distinct vision from
the eye, we take the help of a convex lens of
short focal length. We hold the convex lens in
front of our eye at such a distance that the object
lies within its focal length, so that the lens forms
an erect, virtual, and magnified image on the
same side and behind the object at a distance D.
This magnified image now subtends on the eye
an angle greater than 1’, so it is distinctly seen
by the eye. This is the principle of a simple
microscope (or magnifying glass or reading glass).

Construction : A simple microscope is a
convex lens of short focal length mounted in a
lens holder as shown in Fig. 5.55.

HOLDER

Fig. 5.55 Magnifying glass (or simple microscope)

Way of using the microscope : The lens is
placed near the eye and its distance from the
object is adjusted such that the image is formed
behind the object at a distance D (called the least
distance of distinct vision = 25 cm for the normal
eye) from the lens.

Ray diagram and magnifying power

Ray diagram : In Fig 5.56, AB is an object
(e.g. a word of a print or a part of a watch etc.)
in front of a convex lens. The position of lens is
so adjusted that the object AB lies in between its
optical centre O and focus F, and the image is
formed at the least distance of distinct vision (D).
A ray of light AD from the point A of the object,
incident parallel to the principal axis, after
refraction from the lens, passes through its focus
F, as DF,. The other incident ray AO passing
through the optical centre O gets refracted as OO’
without deviation. The two refracted rays DF, and
OO’ do not actually meet, but they meet at a
point A’ when they are produced backward. Thus
A’ is the virtual image of the point A of the
object. Similarly, for the point B of the object, B’
is the virtual image. Hence A’B’ is the virtual,
magnified and erect image of the object AB. To
observe the image, the eye is kept very close to
the lens on the other side of the object at the
position shown in Fig. 5.56.

Fig. 5.56 Ray diagram for location of image
in a magnifying glass


===== PAGE 26 =====

Magnifying power : The magnifying power
of the microscope is given as :

where f is the focal length of the lens and D is
the least distance of distinct vision (= 25 cm) for
the normal eye.

-(5.4)*

The magnifying power of the microscope can
be increased by using the lens of short focal
length (i.e., shorter the focal length, more is the
magnifying power). But it can not be increased
indefinitely.

Example : The magnifying power of a
convex lens of focal length 100 cm is 1-25, while
that of a convex lens of focal length 5 cm is 6.

Uses : A simple microscope (or magnifying
glass) is used to see and read the small letters and
figures. It is used by watch makers to see the
small parts and screws of the watch. In optical
instruments such as a travelling microscope,
spectrometer, etc. a magnifying glass is provided
above the vernier scale so as to read the scale
accurately. Hence it is also called the reading
lens.

5.15 APPLICATION OF LENSES

Lenses are used in a large number of optical
instruments. Some common applications are given
below :

(1) The objective lens of a telescope, camera, slide
projector, etc., is a convex lens which forms
the real and inverted image of the object.

(2) Our eye lens is also a convex lens. The eye
lens forms the inverted image of the object
on retina.

(3) When our eyesight weakens, we use spectacles
having either the convex or the concave lens.
A person suffering from long sightedness or
hypermetropia (i.e., unable to see the near
objects distinctly) wears spectacles having the
convex lens, while a person suffering from
short sightedness or myopia (i.e., unable to see

* Derivation of the formula is not included in the syllabus.

al ete |

the far objects distinctly) wears spectacles
having the concave lens. Some people are both
short and long sighted. They use either the
separate spectacles for seeing the near and far
objects or use a spectacles with a bifocal lens.
In the spectacles using the bifocal lens, the
lower part is the convex lens which is used to
see the near objects, while the upper part is
the concave lens which is used to see the
distant objects.

(4) A magnifying glass is a convex lens of short
focal length fitted in a steel (or plastic) frame
provided with a handle.

(5) In the collimator of a spectroscope, convex lens
is used for obtaining a a parallel beam of light.

(6) A concave lens is used as the objective lens
in a Galilean telescope to obtain the final erect
image of the object.

(7) A single convex lens usually forms a coloured
or blurred image due to chromatic aberration,
therefore a combination of concave lens
with a convex lens is used to overcome such
defect.

5.16 EXPERIMENTAL DETERMINATION OF
FOCAL LENGTH OF A CONVEX LENS

Estimation of focal length by the distant
object method

Principle : A beam of parallel rays from a
distant object incident on a convex lens gets
converged in the focal plane of the lens.

Method : In an open space, against a white
(or light coloured) wall, place a metre rule
horizontally with its 0 cm end touching the wall
and its other end towards an illuminated object
which is at a very large distance (such as a tree
or an electric pole). Holding the given lens
vertically on the metre rule, focus the object on
the wall by moving the lens to and fro along the
length of the metre rule (Fig. 5.57). Since the
light rays incident from a distant object are nearly
parallel, the image of it formed on the wall is
almost at the focus of the lens, so read the
distance of lens from the wall directly on the

(@)


===== PAGE 27 =====

k— FOCAL LENGTH ———>

Fig. 5.57 Determination of focal length of a convex
lens by the distant object method
metre rule. This gives the approximate focal
length of the lens. Fig. 5.57 shows the formation
of image on the wall of a distant tree situated on
the left of the lens (which is not shown in
diagram). The approximate focal length of the
lens in Fig. 5.57 is 48 cm. The ray diagram for
it is shown in Fig. 5.58.

T ROEVE

Fig. 5.58 Ray diagram showing the focal
‘length of a convex lens
Determination of exact focal length by an
auxillary plane mirror method : If we are
given a vertical stand, a plane mirror, a lens
and a pin, we can proceed as follows :

(2)

(i) Place the lens L on a plane mirror MM’
kept on the horizontal surface of the vertical stand
and arrange the pin P horizontally in the clamp
so that its tip is vertically above the centre O of
the lens L as shown in Fig. 5.59.

VERTICAL
STAND

Fig. 5.59 Determination of focal length of a convex lens
by an auxillary plane mirror

(ii) Adjust the height of the pin till it has no
parallax with its inverted image as seen from
vertically above the pin. To check for parallax,
keep the eye vertically above the tip of the
pin P at a distance nearly 25 cm from it and
move it sideways. If the pin and its image shift
together, then there is no parallax.

(iii) Measure the distance x of the pin P from
the lens and the distance y of the pin from the
mirror, using a metre rule and a plumb line.
Calculate the average of the two distances. This
gives the focal length of the lens, i.e.,

(5.5)

(iv) Take three different observations after
removing the parallax each time and find the mean
value of focal length f of the lens.

Alternative method

The above experiment can also be performed
by using a pin, a convex lens, and a plane mirror
fixed on the separate vertical stands of an optical
bench as shown in Fig. 5.60. We proceed as
follows :

(i) Keep the lens L close to the plane mirror
M. Adjust the height of the object pin O such that
its tip lies at the centre of the convex lens L.

%
Fig. 5.69 Determination of focal length of a convex lens by
one pin method using an optical bench

0 40
xi f

(ii) Move the object pin O away from the lens
L on the optical bench till its inverted image is
seen when viewed by keeping the eye behind the
object pin O at a distance of about 25 cm from
it.

(iii) Now adjust the position of the object pin
O by gradual to and fro movement of it so that

"Saas


===== PAGE 28 =====

the tip of the inverted image I coincides with
the tip of the object pin O. In this situation, on
moving the eye sideways, both the tip of the
object pin and the tip of its image will appear to
move together.

(iv) Note the position of the object pin
(say, x,) and the position of lens (say, x,) on the
optical bench. The difference (x, — x,) gives the
focal length of the convex lens, i.e.,

In Fig. 5.60, x, = 30-0 cm, x, = 60-0 cm, so
f= 60-0 — 30-0 = 30-0 cm.

Explanation : When the object pin O lies in
the focal plane of lens L, the rays of light starting
from O after refraction from lens, become parallel
to its principal axis and therefore they strike
normally on the plane mirror M kept behind the
lens. Due to normal incidence (i = 0°) on the
plane mirror, angle of reflection r = 0°, ie., the
rays are reflected back by the plane mirror on the
same path and then they re-enter the lens as a

Fig. 5.61 Ray diagram for determination of
focal length of a convex lens by using
a pin and a plane mirror

parallel beam. The lens converges these rays in
its focal plane, thus forming the image I just
above the object pin O. The image | is inverted,
real, and of size same as that of the object O.
Fig. 5.61 shows the ray diagram. Thus, the
distance OL (= IL) is equal to the focal length
of lens. .

Note : The position of plane mirror relative
to the lens L (i.e., the distance LM) does not
affect the position of image as long as the rays

from the lens fall normally on the plane mirror
M. However, the plane mirror M is kept close
to the convex lens L so that the image I can
be distinctly seen.

5.17 TO DIFFERENTIATE BETWEEN A
CONVEX AND A CONCAVE LENS

(1) By touching : If the lens is thick in the
middle and thin at the edges, the lens is
convex and if the lens is thin in the
middle and thick at the edges, the lens is
concave.

(2) By seeing the image : (a) On keeping the

lens near a printed page, if letters appear

magnified, the lens is convex and if the
letters appear diminished, the lens is
concave.

(b) On seeing a distant object through the
lens, if its inverted image is seen, the lens
is convex and if the upright image is seen,
the lens is concave.

1. What is a magnifying glass ? State its two uses.

2. Draw a neat labelled ray diagram to show the
formation of image by a magnifying glass. State
three characteristics of the image.

3. Where is the object placed in reference to the
principal focus of a magnifying glass, so as to see its
enlarged image ? Where is the image obtained ?

4. Write expression for the magnifying power of a
simple microscope. How can it be increased ?

5. State two applications each of a convex and concave
lens.

6. Describe in brief how would you determine the
approximate focal length of a convex lens.


===== PAGE 29 =====

7. The diagram in Fig. 5.62 shows the experimental set
up for the determination of focal length of a lens
using a plane mirror.

(i) Draw two rays from the point O of the object to
show the formation of image I at O itself.
(ii) What is the size of the image I ?
(iii) State two more characteristics of the image I.
(iv) Name the distance of the object O from the
optical centre of the lens.
(v) To what point will the rays return if the mirror
is moved away from the lens by a distance
equal to the focal length of the lens ?

8. Describe how you would determine the focal length
of a converging lens, using a plane mirror and one
pin. Draw a ray diagram to illustrate your answer.

9. How will you differentiate between a convex and a
concave lens by looking at (i) a distant object,
(ii) a printed page ?

MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE
1. A magnifying glass forms :
(a) a real and diminished image
(b) a real and magnified image
(c) a virtual and magnified image
(d) a virtual and diminished image.
Ans. (c) a virtual and magnified image.

2. The maximum magnifying power of a convex lens

of focal length 5 cm can be :
(a) 25 (b) 10

(c) 1 (d) 6 Ans. (d) 6

