

===== PAGE 1 =====

Household Circuits

SYLLABUS

I of syllabus : House wiring (ring system), power distribution; main circuit (3 wires — live, neutral, earth) with
ACB, main switch and its advantages, circuit diagram, two-way switch, staircase wiring, need for earthing,
3-pin plug and socket, conventional location of live, neutral and earth points in 3-pin plugs and sockets; safety

ns, colour coding of wires.

9.1 TRANSMISSION OF POWER FROM
THE GENERATING STATION TO THE
CONSUMER

Electric power is generated at the power
generating stations which are usually located very
far from the areas where it is consumed. At the
generating station, the electric power is generated
at 11 kV because generation at voltage higher
than 11 kV causes insulation difficulties, while
generation at voltage lower than 11 kV involves

a very high current. Since it is not possible to

step up or step down the d.c. voltage, the voltage

generated is alternating of frequency 50 Hz

(i.e., its polarity at the terminals changes

100 times a second, 50 times + and 50 times -).

The power from the generating station
is transmitted to the consumer over the long
distances not at 11 kV, but at a voltage higher
than 11 kV so as to reduce the loss of energy in

| OF POWER AND HOUSE WIRING

form of heat in the line wires used for
transmission.

From relation P = VI, for a given power P,
current J = P/V i.e., higher the voltage, lower is
the current. Thus by supplying a given electric
power at a high voltage, the current becomes low
and therefore the loss of energy due to heating
(=PRt) in the line wires becomes less. Thus, the
alternating voltage generated is first stepped up
from 11 kV to 132 kV at the generating station
(or called the grid sub-station) using the step up
transformer. It is then transmitted to the main
sub-station. At the main sub-station, the voltage
is stepped down from 132 kV to 33 kV using the
step down transformer and is then transmitted to
the heavy industries and intermediate sub-station.
At the intermediate sub-station, the voltage is
again stepped down from 33 kV to 11 kV using

33kV___ To HEAVY INDUSTRY

POWER STATION
Fig. 9.1 Transmission of electricity from power generating station to the consumers

XX EX XEXXEDS

¢

re:



===== PAGE 2 =====

the step down transformer and from here it is
transmitted to light industries and city sub-station.
At the city sub-station, it is further stepped down
from 11 kV to 220 V using the step down
transformer to supply it to the domestic
consumers. The transmission of electric
power from the generating station to the consumer
is shown in Fig. 9.1.

Fig. 9.2 shows the simple block diagram of
the transmission of electric power from the
generating station to the consumer.

To heavy industry

Main sub station
step down to 33 kV
Intermediate sub station

step down to 11 kV

To light industry
Fig. 9.2 Block diagram of transmission of electricity
from power station to the consumer

9.2 POWER DISTRIBUTION TO A HOUSE

To supply the electric power to a house from
the city sub-station, either the overhead wires* or
a cable on poles or an underground cable is used.
The cable has three wires : (1) live (or phase)
wire (L), (2) neutral wire (N), and (3) earth
wire (E). The neutral and the earth wires are
connected together at the local sub-station so that
the neutral and earth wires are at the same
potential (i.e., at 0 V). The live wire, also called
the phase wire, carries current from the source to
the distribution board, while the neutral wire is
for the return of current to the source.

Before connecting the cable from pole to
the meter in a house, first a fuse of high rating
(= 50 A) is connected in the live wire at the pole
(or just before the meter). This fuse is called the
company fuse (or pole fuse). Only the persons of

Power generating
station
at 11 kV

Grid sub station!
step up
to 132 kV

City sub station
To step down to
consumer 220 V

* There is usually a set of six wires stretched one above the
other from one pole to the other pole. From the top, their
sequence is : first neutral wire; second, third and fourth the
three phase (or live) wires; fifth the street light live wire and
then sixth the earth wire. The live (or phase) wires are thicker
than the neutral and earth wires. Live (or phase) wires are
generally made by twisting the several wires together.

the electric supply company are authorised to
handle it. The rating of the fuse depends on the
load for which the connection is taken from the
company. After the company fuse, the cable is
connected to a kWh meter. The kWh meter is
usually mounted on the front (or outside) wall of
the house. From the meter, connections are made
to a main switch (or earth leakage circuit breaker
ELCB) and to a main fuse (or miniature circuit
breaker MCB). The main switch (or ELCB) is
connected in both the live and neutral wires,
while the main fuse (or MCB) is connected only
in the live wire.

The main switch is a double pole switch. It
has an iron covering. The covering is earthed (i.e.,
connected to the earth wire E). The advantage of
using the main switch is that it breaks the
connections of the live as well as the neutral
wires simultaneously from the main supply. The
earth wire from the meter is locally earthed (in
the compound of the liouse). From the distribution
board, the wires go to the different parts of the
house. Now a days a consumer unit is connected
after the kWh meter. This unit contains a double
pole switch or an earth leakage circuit breaker
(ELCB) and MCB for each circuit in the house.

Fig. 9.3 shows the connections from the
electric pole to the distribution box in a house.

Fig. 9.3 Connections by cable from electric pole to
the distribution box

9.3 HOUSE WIRING (RING SYSTEM)

In a house, the wiring is commonly done by
the ring system. In this system, we have a
separate ring for each portion of the house. In a
portion, the wires starting from the distribution
box run around all the rooms of that portion and
then come back to the distribution box, thus


===== PAGE 3 =====

forming a ring. The distribution box contains a
MCB of rating about 30 A. Fig. 9.4 shows a ring
system of wiring connecting a lamp, socket with
switch and fan with regulator.

LAMP SOCKET OUTLET

DISTRIBTION BOX
Fig. 9.4 The ring system of house wiring showing circuit for
lamp, socket and fan with fuse and switches in the live wire

A separate connection is taken for each
appliance from the live wire of the ring. One
terminal of the appliance is connected to the live
wire through a separate fuse and a separate switch,
while the other terminal of the appliance is directly
connected to the neutral wire. The earth terminal
or metal covering of the appliance is connected to
the earth wire. For each appliance, the wires used
for connection should be of proper current carrying
capacity.

Advantages of the ring system : The ring
system has the following four advantages :

(1) In the ring system, the current from mains
can reach to an individual appliance through
two separate paths. Thus each appliance gets
connected to the mains effectively through a
thick wire. Therefore, the wire required for
main ring is of a lower current carrying
capacity than that which would be required
for a direct connection to the mains. This
considerably reduces the cost of wiring.

(2) Each appliance has a separate fuse. Therefore

if due to some fault, the fuse of one appliance

burns, it does not affect the operation of other
appliances.

(3) In this system, all the plugs and sockets used

can be of same size, but each socket should

have its own fuse of rating suitable for the
appliances to be connected with it.

(4) While installing a new appliance in a room,
a new line up to the distribution box is not
required, but it can be directly connected to
the ring circuit in that room. The care is taken
that the total current drawn from the mains
in the ring circuit does not exceed the rating
of the main fuse (viz. 30 A).

Connection of all appliances (bulb, fan,
socket, etc.) with the mains

We note that all the electrical appliances (say,
bulbs, fans, sockets, etc.) are connected in
parallel with the mains. In the live wire before
each appliance there is a separate switch and a
separate fuse connected in series.

Advantages of connecting the appliances in
parallel
It has the following two main advantages :
(1) Each appliance gets connected to 220 V
supply (= its voltage rating) for its normal
working.
Each appliance operates independently
without being affected whether the other
appliances are operated or not.

(2)

Disadvantages of connecting the appliances
in series

Appliances are not connected in series to the
mains for the following three reasons.

(1) The voltage of the source gets divided in
all the appliances connected in series, in
ratio of their resistances, so each appliance
does not operate at its rated voltage.

On connecting one more appliance in the
same circuit, the resistance of the circuit
will increase. Hence it will reduce the
current in the circuit, so each appliance
will get less power.

All appliances connected in series operate
simultaneously. None of the appliance can
be operated independently. If one
appliance is switched off (or not operated),
no other appliance connected with it in
series will then operate.

(2)

(G3)


===== PAGE 4 =====

imemmeerammmmaeear sian EXAMPLES mio-comonnnemnioent

1,

2.

(a)

(b)

Ce

re

How will you connect a bulb and a socket in a
room to the mains ? Draw a labelled diagram in
support of your answer. Use switch and fuse
wherever necessary.

In a room, the bulb and socket are connected in
parallel with the mains as shown in Fig. 9.5 below.

Fig. 9.5

The diagram in Fig. 9.6 shows a battery, a switch
and two bulbs. (a) Complete the diagram to show
the electric connections of the bulbs to the battery.
(b) How have you joined the bulbs in part (a) ?

Give reason.
(“9

BULB : BATTERY
BULB §

——
Fig. 9.6
The completed diagram is shown in Fig. 9.7.

Fig. 9.7

The two bulbs are connected in parallel.

Reason : (1) Both the bulbs glow at the same
voltage. (2) If one bulb ceases to glow, the other
bulb remains glowing.

The diagram in Fig. 9.8 shows the electrical
system of a car to operate the two head lights
and two rear lights by a switch.

>} _ shows a connection to the body of the car.

REAR LIGHT

Fig. 9.8

The diagram shows only one lead from the
battery to each bulb, but a complete circuit must
have two leads. How does the current get back
to the battery ?

The two rear lights as connected in diagram glow
faintly. Why do they glow faintly ? How should
they be connected to glow brightly ? Show by a
separate diagram.

(iii) If the lights are on, they become dim when the

car is started. Give a reason.

(i) One lead of the battery and one terminal of the
appliance (i.e., bulb) is connected to the body
of the car (i.e., to the earth). The current gets
back to the battery through the body of the
car (i.e., earth). Thus the body of the car
behaves like the other lead.

(ii) The two rear lights are connected in series so each
light glows at half the voltage of the battery (if the
resistance of filament of each bulb is same). Hence
they glow faintly. They must be connected
in parallel to glow properly as shown below in
Fig. 9.9.

(iii) When the car is started, it draws heavy current

from the battery. The terminal voltage of
the battery falls due to voltage drop. As a result,
the voltage across each bulb falls and they

become dim.
sd}


===== PAGE 5 =====

4. An electric bulb rated ‘220 V, 60 W’ glows when
connected with 220 V mains.

(i) Find the resistance of the filament of the
bulb.
Another identical bulb is connected in series
with the first one and the system is connected
across the 220 V mains. Draw a diagram to show
the arrangement and find : (a) the rate of
consumption of energy in each bulb, and (ii) total
power consumed.
If two bulbs are connected in parallel, draw a
diagram of this arrangement. What will then
be the total power consumed ?
Given : rating of bulb is 220 V, 60 W i.e., voltage
V = 220 volt and power P = 60 watt.

(i) Resistance of filament of the bulb
2 2
= Vo = OO _ 906-670

“P60
The arrangement of two identical bulbs in series
with the mains is shown in Fig. 9.10. In this

BULB 1 BULB 2

(ii)

(iii)

(ii)

1. At what voltage and frequency is the electric power
generated at the power generating station ?
Ans. Voltage — 11 kV, Frequency — 50 Hz

2. Explain with the aid of a simple diagram, the

transmission of electric power from the generating
station to your house.

3. (a) At what voltage is the electric power from the
generating station transmitted ? Give reason to
your answer.

(b) What is the nature of current transmitted from
the power station ?

4. At what (i) voltage and (ii) frequency is the a.c.

supplied to our houses ?
Ans. (i) 220 V, (ii) 50 Hz

5. Name the device used to (a) increase the voltage at

the generating station, and (b) decrease the voltage
at the sub station for its supply.

6. (a) Name the three connecting wires used in a
household circuit.

arrangement voltage across each bulb will be

V = 110 volt.
(a) Rate of consumption of energy in each bulb
vy? _ (110)
= Rk = 30667 715 W

Assuming that the resistance of bulb does not
change on glowing.

(b) Total power consumed in the two bulbs
=15W+15W=30 W

(iii) The arrangement of two identical bulbs in
parallel with the mains is shown in Fig. 9.11.
In this arrangement, voltage across each bulb
will be V = 220 volt and then power spent in
each bulb will be 60 W.
Total power consumed in the two bulbs

= 60 W + 60 W = 120 W

BULB 1

(b) Which of the two wires mentioned in
part (a) are at the same potential ?

(c) In which of the wire stated in part (a), the
switch is connected ?

7. What is the pole fuse ? Write down its current rating.
8. State the function of each of the following in a
house circuiting :
(a) kWh meter, (b) main fuse, and (c) main switch.
9. In what unit does the electric meter in a house
measure the electrical energy consumed ? What is its
value in S.I. unit 2 Ans. kWh, 1 kWh = 3-6 x 10°J
10. Where is the main fuse connected in a house
circuit 2? Ans. In live wire before the ring system.
ll. State one advantage of using the main switch in
house wiring.
12. Draw a circuit diagram to explain the ring system of
house wiring. State two advantages of it.
Draw a labelled diagram with the necessary switch,
regulator, etc. to connect a bulb and a fan with the

13.


===== PAGE 6 =====

mains. In what arrangement are they connectéd to
the mains : series or parallel ?

14. How should the several electric lamps be connected
with the mains so that the switching on or off a lamp
has no effect on the operation of other lamps ?

Ans. In parallel

15. Fig. 9.12 shows three bulbs
A, B and C each of rating
100 W, 220 V connected to
the mains of 220 V. Answer
the following :
(a) How is the bulb A
connected with the
mains ? At what
voltage does it glow ?
How are the bulbs B and C connected with the
mains ? At what voltage does the bulb B glow ?
How is the glow of bulbs A and C affected if
bulb B gets fused ?
How is the glow of bulbs B and C affected if
bulb A gets fused ?
Ans. (a) parallel, 220 V, (b) series, 110 V,
(c) A—no effect, C—does not glow
(d) both unaffected

(b)

(d)

16. Two sets A and B each of four bulbs are glowing in
two separate rooms. When one of the bulbs in set A
is fused, the other three bulbs also cease to glow.
But in set B, when one bulb fuses, the other bulbs
continue to glow. (i) Explain the difference in the
two sets. (ii) Which set of arrangement is preferred
in housing circuit and why ?

[Hint : In set A, the bulbs are in series; while in
set B, the bulbs are in parallel].

MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE
1. The main fuse is connected in :
(a) live wire
(b) neutral wire
(c) both the live and earth wires
(d) both the earth and neutral wires.

Ans. (a) live wire.
2. The electrical appliances in a house are connected in:
(a) series
(b) parallel

(c) either in series or parallel

(d) both in series and parallel. Ans. (b) parallel.
3. The electric meter in a house records :

(a) charge , (b) current

(c) energy (d) power. Anns. (c) energy

9.4 FUSE

We have read that a main fuse (or MCB) is
connected in the live wire after the kWh meter
and before the main circuit. The fuse protects the
circuit by blowing off when the circuit either gets
over loaded (i.e., total load in the house exceeds
the load limit for which connection is taken from
the company) or gets short circuited*. Similarly,
a fuse is connected with each electrical appliance
to safeguard it from the flow of current in excess
of its safe limit of current.

A fuse wire permits the flow of current
through it only up to a certain fixed limit
which is called the current rating of the fuse.
As the current exceeds this limit, the temperature
contact with the neutral wire, so a zero resistance path is

provided to the current. A heavy current then passes through
the live wire of the circuit.

of the fuse wire reaches the melting point and
the wire melts so that the circuit gets broken.
Thus,

Principle : A fuse works on the heating effect
of current. A fuse wire of length J, radius r and
of material of which specific resistance is p, has

pl

its resistance R = —. Due to flow of current J

Tw
in it, heat produced per second in the fuse wire
will be H = 1°R = Ppl/ nr?
If T is the temperature of surrounding of the
fuse wire and AT is the rise in its temperature,


===== PAGE 7 =====

loss of heat by radiation per second will be
H = 40 T3 AT x 2nrl w+-(ii)
where o (= 5-67 x 10° W m® K~%) is a constant.
In equilibrium, from eqns. (i) and (ii),
I’pl 3 538
—, = 40 T? AT x 2m w+. (iii)
ar

“. The temperature of fuse wire above its

surroundings is

AT

2 2
I
=x —
8x°oT? p * Br ss r

Thus the rise in temperature of fuse wire
depends on (i) current rating J, and (ii) its
radius r. It is directly proportional to the square
of current and inversely proprotional to the cube
of its radius. It does not depend on the length of
the wire.

w(9.1)

Example : A fuse wire of current rating
1-0 A is of radius 0-2 mm, while the fuse wire
of current rating 8-0 A is of radius 0-8 mm.

Thus the thickness of fuse wire depends on its
current rating. Higher the current rating, thicker
is the fuse wire.

A fuse is a short and thin piece of wire of
uniform area of cross-section and high resistance
so as to produce sufficient heat to melt it. It is
made up of a material of low melting point, so
that it may easily melt due to overheating when
current in excess to the prescribed limit, passes
through it. Generally an alloy of lead and tin is
used as the material of the fuse wire because its
melting point is low (= 250°C) and specific
resistance is more than that of copper, aluminium,
etc.

A copper or aluminium wire is unsuitable
for use as the fuse wire because they have
high melting point (~ 1080°C). Moreover the
use of an ordinary copper or aluminium wire as
a fuse must be avoided as it is very thick so it
will not melt even if the current exceeds its safe
limit.

Construction : Fig. 9.13 shows one of the
most common fuse arrangement in which the fuse

PORCELAIN HOLDER

LIVE WIRE SOCKET (FIXED ON BOARD)

Fig. 9.13 Fuse arrangement

wire F is stretched between the two metallic
terminals T, and T, in a porcelain holder (since
porcelain is an insulator of electricity). This
holder fits into a porcelain socket having two
metallic terminals to each of which the live wire
of the circuit is connected. Thus the fuse wire
gets connected in the live wire.

Working : When current in the circuit exceeds
the specified value (due to any reason such as
high voltage, short circuiting, etc.) the temperature
of the fuse wire rises to the extent that it melts.
As a result, a gap is produced and the circuit
breaks (Fig. 9.14). Now current does not flow
through the live wire and the appliance (or the
circuit) is saved. After removing the fault in the
circuit, a new fuse wire of the same current rating
is connected in the holder to complete the circuit
again.

LIVE WIRE

BROKEN
FUSE WIRE

LIVE WIRE

Fig. 9.14 Function of fuse (due to excessive current,

fuse melts and circuit breaks)

Now a days the costly appliances such as
refrigerator, air conditioner, geyser, television, etc.
are provided with a cartridge type fuse (Fig. 9.15)
of proper current rating such as 1 A, 2 A, 5 A,
10 A and 13 A.


===== PAGE 8 =====

FUSE WIRE '
(SOLDERED TO ENDS)

GLASS CASE

METAL CAPS'
Fig. 9.15 Cartridge type fuse

Reason for connecting the fuse in the live
wire

The fuse is always connected in the live wire
before the appliance, so that as the current in
circuit exceeds the rating of fuse, it may melt and
break the circuit first, before the current reaches
the appliance. Thus no current flows in the
appliance.

In Fig. 9.16 (a), the fuse F is connected in the
live wire joined to the appliance through the
mains. The circuit is complete and current flows
in the appliance. In Fig. 9.16 (b), due to voltage
fluctuation (or short circuiting), if excessive
current flows, the fuse F blows off, the circuit
becomes incomplete and no current flows in the
appliance.

LIVE

(b) No current flowing in the
appliance when the fuse blows off.

(a) Current flowing in the
appliance through the fuse.

Fig. 9.16 Function of fuse.

It is unsafe to connect the fuse in the neutral
wire. Fig. 9.17 (a) shows the fuse F in the neutral
wire. If due to some defect in the appliance an
excessive current flows in the circuit, the fuse
blows and current stops flowing in the circuit, but
the appliance still remains connected to the high
potential point of the supply through the live wire
[Fig. 9.17(b)]. Now if a person touches the faulty
appliance, he gets an electric shock because the
person comes in direct contact of the mains

Neutral

(a) Current flowing in the
circuit

(b) Appliance connected to
the high potential even when
fuse blows off

Fig. 9.17 Fuse connected in neutral wire.

through the live wire. Thus it is highly unsafe to
use fuse in the neutral wire.

Current rating of a fuse

In electric wiring for light and fan circuits a
thin fuse wire of low current rating (~ 5 A) is
used because the line wire has a current carrying
capacity of 5 A. A thick fuse wire of higher
current rating (~ 15 A) is used for heavy current
consuming appliances such as air conditioner,
geyser, washing machine, etc. because the line
wire for such appliances has a current carrying
capacity of 15 A.

The current rating of the fuse in a circuit can
be obtained from the following relation :

+(9.2)

The table below gives the current rating of the
fuse needed for various appliances.
Current rating of fuse for various appliances



===== PAGE 9 =====

Note : The fuse provided (or connected)
with an electric appliance to protect it against
electric faults must be of current rating a little
more than the maximum current that can be
drawn by the appliance before being over
heated. But some electric appliances such as
mixer, water pump, etc. having an electric
motor in it, draws a heavier current when it
is switched on, as compared to that when it is
in running condition. So the fuse for such
appliances must be of current rating some what
more than the starting current. For example, a
water pump rated 1-5 kW, 220 V has a motor
which draws current 10-4 A at the starting
and then 6-8 A while running. Hence
the fuse with it must have a current rating not
less than 10-5 A.

MCB : Now a days instead of a fuse, a
miniature circuit breaker (MCB) is used for each
individual circuit. If due to short circuiting (or
some fault), a heavy current flows in the line, the
MCB falls down to switch off the circuit in a
very short time (= 25 milli-second). After
repairing the fault in the circuit, the MCB is then
raised up. Thus the use of MCB is easier than a
fuse because (i) it avoids the inconvenience of
connecting a new fuse wire, and (ii) it is much
safer due to its quick response.

9.5 SWITCHES

Switches are of various kind and they are
made in many fascinating designs. We classify the
switches in two groups : (1) single pole switch,
and (2) double pole switch.

(1) Single pole switch ; The switch used with
an appliance to start or stop the flow of
current in it, is the single pole switch. A
single pole switch disconnects only the
live wire from the appliance.

Double pole switch : The main switch at
the distribution board, used to switch on

(2)

or off the mains, is the double pole
switch. A double pole switch disconnects
both the live and neutral wires
simultaneously.

The dual control switch used in a staircase*
etc., is also the double pole switch of special
kind.

Reason for connecting the switch in the live
wire ;

The switch should always be connected in the
live wire. Fig. 9.18 (a) shows the switch S
connected in the live wire and the switch S is in
‘on’ position. The appliance (say, bulb) gets
connected to the high potential point through the
live wire and current flows in the appliance
because the circuit is complete as the neutral wire
provides the return path for the current. In
Fig. 9.18 (b), in the ‘off position of switch S, the
circuit is incomplete and no current reaches the
appliance through the live wire. The appliance
does not operate (i:e., the bulb does not glow).
It is now safe to carry out repairs in the
appliance, if required. Even the live wire
connection of the appliance can be touched if the
switch is in ‘off position because both the live
wire and neutral wire connected with the
appliance are at zero potential.

SWITCH
s L
SUPPLY
(a) Switch in ‘on’ position
SWITCH
L
Ss
SUPPLY
N

(b) Switch in ‘off’ position
Fig. 9.18 Switch connected in live wire

It is deceptive and dangerous to connect a
switch in the neutral wire. In Fig. 9.19, switch is

* See article 9.6


===== PAGE 10 =====

connected in the neutral wire. In the ‘on’ position
[Fig. 9.19(a)], it allows current to flow in the
bulb and in the ‘off position [Fig. 9.19(b)], no
current passes through the bulb. Thus the switch
serves its purpose. But in the ‘off position of
switch, the appliance remains connected to the
high potential terminal through the live wire,
although no current flows through the appliance
because the return path is incomplete (or broken).
In this condition, it is not safe to carry out any
repairs in the appliance because on touching the
live wire in the appliance, the current will pass
through the body of the person and he may get
a fatal shock. Further due to some fault (or any
other reason), if the live wire touches the metallic
body of the appliance, then it is not safe to touch
the appliance even from outside. Thus, if the
switch is connected in the neutral wire, it can be
quite deceptive and dangerous for the user.

Li

SUPPLY
N

s SWITCH

(a) Switch in ‘on’ position

L
SUPPLY

SWITCH
s dll ey N

(b) Appliance at high potential even when switch is in ‘off’ position
Fig. 9.19 Switch connected in neutral wire

Safety precaution while using a switch : A
switch should never be touched with wet hands.
If water reaches the live wire, it forms a
conducting layer between the hand and the live
wire of the switch due to which a current passes
to the hand through it and the person may get a
fatal shock.

9.6 CIRCUITS WITH DUAL CONTROL
SWITCHES (STAIRCASE WIRING)

We have read that the switch used in the live
wire with the appliances to put them ‘on’ or ‘off’
is the single pole type switch. Dual control switch

is the double pole type switch of special kind
which is generally used one at the top and other
at the bottom of a staircase, or one each at the
opposite ends of a long corridor, etc. With such
switches, the appliance (say, a bulb) can be
switched on or off from two different places.

The connections of a dual control switch are
illustrated in Fig. 9.20. It is operated in two
ways : (1) by shifting the knob of switch to the
right (or up), the live wire L connected at the
terminal ‘b’ makes contact to the terminal ‘a’ so
as to make the connection ‘ba’ through the spring
metal strip, and (2) by shifting the knob to the
left (or down), the terminal ‘b’ makes contact
with the terminal ‘c’ so as to make the connection
*hc*:

To other se Springy
metal strip

To other switch ¢ SP

Fig. 9.20 Dual control switch

Fig. 9.21 illustrates the working of a dual
control switch. Two such switches S, and S, are
used. The switch S, is fitted at the bottom and
the switch S, at the top of the staircase.
Fig. 9.21(a) shows the ‘off’ position of the bulb.

The bulb can now be switched ‘on’
independently by either the switch S, or the
switch S,. If the switch S, is operated, the
connection ‘ba’ is changed to ‘bc’, which
completes the circuit and the bulb lights up
[Fig. 9.21(b)]. Similarly, on operating the switch
S, from the position shown in Fig. 9.21(a), the
connection ‘bc’ changes to ‘ba’, which again
completes the circuit [Fig. 9.21(c)] and the bulb
lights up.

Similarly, if the bulb is in ‘on’ position as
shown in Fig. 9.21(b), one can switch ‘off’ the
bulb by changing the connections ‘be’ to ‘ba’
either by operating the switch S, or the switch


===== PAGE 11 =====

Reecerovencel 2

(a) Bulb off

(c) Bulb on through switch S,
Fig. 9.21 Working of a dual control switch

S,. But if the bulb is in ‘on’ position as shown
in Fig. 9.21(c), it can be switched ‘off’ by
changing the connections ‘ba’ to ‘bc’ either by the
switch S, or the switch S,,.

In a staircase, while going up a person puts
‘on’ the light by operating the switch S, so that
the connection ‘ba’ changes to ‘be’ and makes the
current to flow in the circuit. On reaching at the
top he operates the switch S, to put off the light
so that the connection ‘bc’ changes to ‘ba’ and
the flow of current stops.

The same system is operative when a person
puts on light by operating the switch S, to change
the connection ‘bc’ to ‘ba’ and swtich ‘off’ the
light by operating the switch S, to change the
connection ‘ba’ to ‘bc’.

9.7 EARTHING (GROUNDING)

(a) Local earthing

We have read that the local earthing is done
in the house near the kWh meter. For this
purpose, a hole nearly 2-3 metre deep is dug in
the ground. A copper rod (or a thick copper wire)
covered by a hollow insulating pipe, is inserted

a

in the hole. A thick copper plate of dimensions
50 cm x 50 cm is welded to the lower end of
the copper rod and it is buried in the ground as
shown in Fig. 9.22. The plate is surrounded by a
mixture of charcoal and salt to make a good
contact between the plate and the earth. To keep
the ground damp, water is poured through the
pipe from time to time. This forms a conducting
layer between the plate and the ground. The upper
end of the copper rod is joined to the earth
connection at the kWh meter.

TO EARTH
CONNECTION AT
GROUND kWh METER
THICK COPPER WIRE
HOLLOW PIPE
MIXTURE OF
CHARCOAL
THICK COPPER AND SALT
PLATE

Fig. 9.22 Local earthing

Safety by the local earthing : If due to some
reason such as short circuiting, an excessive
current flows through the line wires, it will pass
to earth through the earth wire if there is local
earthing, otherwise the line wires may get over
heated and it may cause a fire.

(b) Earthing of an appliance

It is essential to provide a connection for
earthing an electrical appliance having a metallic
case (such as refrigerator, toaster, geyser, electric
iron, electric cooler, etc.) which we handle
physically. For this, the earth wire of the cable
is connected to the terminal provided on the outer
metallic case of the appliance. Fig. 9.23 shows

FUSE sat

*—, ELEMENT
OF

4) APPLIANCE

Fig. 9.23 Earthing of an appliance

L

SOURCE METALLIC CASE OF

THE APPLIANCE
TERMINAL



===== PAGE 12 =====

the live and neutral wires connected from the
source to the element of appliance through the
insulating plugs on its metallic case. The switch
and the fuse are connected in the live wire. The
earth wire is connected to the metallic case of
appliance.

Note : (1) The symbol ~ can also be used
for showing the earthing of an appliance.
(2) Most often the metallic case of appliance
is painted. The paint provides an insulating

layer on the metallic body of appliance. To
make the earth connection, it is necessary to
remove paint from the body part where
connection is to be made.

Safety by earthing of an appliance : When
the live wire of a faulty appliance comes in direct
contact with its metallic case due to break of
insulation after constant use (or otherwise), the
appliance acquires the high potential of the live
wire. A person touching it will get a fatal shock
because current flows through his body to the
earth. But if the metallic case of appliance is
properly earthed, then as soon the live wire comes
in contact with the metallic case of the appliance,
a heavy current flows to the earth through the
case of the appliance (since the metallic case has
almost zero resistance) and the fuse connected in
the circuit of appliance blows off, and the
appliance gets disconnected. Thus, the person
touching the defective appliance does not get any
shock and the appliance is also saved from being
damaged.

9.8 THREE-PIN PLUG AND SOCKET

Three-pin plug

All electric appliances are provided with a
cable having a plug at one end to connect the
appliance to the electric supply. It is a fixture
provided with three metallic (usually brass) pins
in an ebonite case as shown in Fig. 9.24.

In a three pin plug, the top pin is for earthing,
the pin on the left is for live and the pin on the
right is for neutral. In the good quality plugs,

these are marked as E, L and N respectively
[Fig. 9.24]. The pins are splitted at the ends to
provide a spring action so that they fit in the
socket holes tightly.

Fig. 9.24 Three-pin plug

The earth pin is thicker and longer than the
other two. The earth pin is made long so that the
earth connection is made first. This ensures the
safety of the user because if the appliance is
defective, then as soon as the live pin gets
connected, the current passes to the earth and the
fuse blows off. Further the earth pin is thicker so
that even by mistake it cannot be inserted into the
hole of the socket for the live or neutral
connection. :

The plug is inserted into the socket so as to
obtain current from the mains.

Note ; Sometimes the plug used with an

appliance (such as table lamp or night lamp)

consuming low power, has only two pins, the
live pin on the left and the neutral pin on the
right.

Socket :

Fig. 9.25 shows a socket. It is a fixture in an
electric circuit in which the plug is inserted. The
socket has three holes. The inner wall of each
hole is made of hollow metallic tube usually of
brass, forming the terminal at its back. These
terminals are connected to the live, neutral and
earth wires of the supply line. The upper bigger
hole in the socket is for earth connection, while
the hole on the right side is for connection to the

Fig. 9.25 Socket


===== PAGE 13 =====

live wire and the hole on the left side is for A high tension wire has a low resistance and

connection to the neutral wire of electric supply.

Safety precautions for plug and socket :
While inserting the plug into a socket, the
following two main precautions are taken :

(1) The hands must be completely dry.

(2) The plug pins should fit in the socket
tightly. Any loose connection will give rise
to sparking and burning of either the
socket or the plug.

9.19 COLOUR CODING OF WIRES IN A
CABLE

Each electric appliance is provided with a
three-core flexible cable. The insulation on the
three wires is of different colours : red (or
brown), black (or light blue), and green.

Colour coding of wires in a cable

The colour coding of wires helps us to
connect the switch, fuse, socket etc. through
proper wire in house wiring.

9.10 HIGH TENSION WIRES

Each wire in a cable is capable to withstand
up to a specific limit of current. If current
exceeds this limit (due to short circuiting or high
voltage fluctuations), the wire may burn due to
excessive heating, and it may cause a fire. To
avoid it, for high voltage and heavy current, a
special wire, called the high tension wire, is used.

large surface area. Therefore, instead of taking a
single thick wire of low resistance as the high
tension wire, it is made by twisting together a
number of thin wires insulated from each other.
This provides a large surface area so that it
radiates the heat produced more readily to the
surroundings as compared to a single thick wire.

9.11 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS WHILE USING
THE ELECTRICITY

While using the electricity, precautions are
taken to avoid the two major dangers : (1) a fire,
and (2) an electric shock.

(1) A fire is caused when there is over
heating of the line wires (or cable) for
various reasons such as break of
insulation or short circuiting, etc. To avoid
it, one must use wires (or cable) of
current carrying capacity higher than the
total current which can flow through the
circuit while using all the appliances
simultaneously.

An electric shock may be caused from an
appliance due to (a) poor insulation of
wires, (b) touching the appliance with wet
hands, (c) no earthing of the appliance,
(d) no fuse provided with the appliance,
(e) no local earthing. To avoid it, five
precautions are taken : (i) The insulation
of wires must be of good quality and it
should be checked from time to time. The
reason is that with the passage of time,
the insulation over the wire becomes
brittle and it cracks off leaving the wire
naked. (ii) The appliance should never be
operated (or touched) with wet hands.
The hands should always be kept dry.
(iii) Each appliance must have its metallic
case earthed. (iv) Each appliance must be
provided with a proper fuse in its live
wire before the appliance. (v) There must
be proper local earthing near the kWh
meter.

(2)



===== PAGE 14 =====

1.

2.

3:

5,

An electric motor of power 3 kW is to be
operated at mains of 220 V. Find the current
rating of the fuse to be comected with the motor.

Given P = 3 kW = 3000 W, V= 220 V

P 3

Current drawn by the motor J = v= ot =13-6A
Current rating of fuse to be used with motor = 15 A
A house has main fuse of 5 A rating. 5 bulbs each
of 60 W and 2 tube lights each of 40 W are used
simultaneously. Find :

() the current drawn from the mains of 220 V,
and (ii) the number of additional bulbs each of
100 W which can also be lighted on a festival day?
(i) Total power of appliances used simultaneously

P = (5 x 60) + (2 x 40) = 380 W

Voltage of mains V = 220 volt

What is a fuse ? Name the material of fuse. State
one characteristic of material used for fuse.

. Name the device used to protect the electric circuits

from over loading and short circuit. On what effect
of current does it work ?

Complete the following sentences :

(a) A fuse is a short piece of wire of high .............
and of material of low

(b) A fuse wire is made of an alloy of ..............
and If the current in a circuit
exceeds the current rating of the fuse wire, it

(c) A fuse is connected in

sdessaevarssazavent with the
(d) Higher the current rating, ...........00 is the fuse

wire.
Ans. (a) resistance, melting point (b) lead, tin, melts
(c) series, live, (d) thicker
Why is the fuse wire fitted in a porcelain casing ?
Ans. porcelain is an insulator of electricity
How is a fuse put in an electric circuit ? State the
purpose of using a fuse in a circuit.
Describe with the aid of a diagram some form of a
fuse which is used in the electric lighting circuit of

r=

7

8.

Current drawn from the mains

_ P _ 380

= ™ 200

(ii) Excess current available which can be safely
used = 5A- 1-73 A=3-27A

Current drawn by each bulb of 100 W at 220 V,

P _ 100 _o,
=== 0-45 A
.. Number of additional bulbs of 100 W which
can be lighted on a festival day

excess current available

nm = current drawn by each bulb
3-27
045 = 73

ie., Seven more bulbs can be lighted.

a house. Give two reasons why a fuse must not be

replaced by an ordinary copper wire.

A fuse is always connected in the live wire of the

circuit. Explain the reason.

(a) Two fuse wires are rated 5 A and 20 A. Which
of the two is (i) thicker, (ii) longer ?

Ans. (i) 20 A fuse wire (ii) both may be of same length.

9.

10.

11.

Explain the meaning of the statement 'the current
rating of a fuse is 5 A’.
‘A fuse is rated 8 A'. Can it be used with an
electrical appliance of rating 5 kW, 200 V ?

Ans. No

An electric kettle is rated 3 kW, 250 V. Give reason
whether this kettle can be used in a circuit which
contains a fuse of current rating 13 A.

Ans. Yes, because safe limit of current for kettle is 12 A

12.

13.

(a) What is the purpose of a switch in a circuit ?

(b) Why is the switch put in the live wire ?

(c) What precaution do you take while handling a
switch?

(a) A switch is not touched with wet hands while
putting it on or off. Give a reason for your
answer.

(b) Name the wire to which a switch is connected.


===== PAGE 15 =====

14,

15.

16.

17,
18.

Draw a circuit diagram using the dual control
switches to light a staircase electric light and explain
its working.

What purpose is served by the terminals of a

three way pin plug ? Draw a diagram and name the

pins.

The diagram in Fig. 9.26 shows a three pin plug.

Label the three pins.

(a) Why is the top pin thicker
and longer than the other
two ?

(b) Why are the pins splitted
at the ends ?

Draw a labelled diagram of a three pin socket.

The diagram in Fig. 9.27 shows a three-pin socket

marked as 1, 2 and 3.

(a) Identify and write live (L),
neutral (N) and earth (E) against
the correct number.

Fig. 9.26

(b) To which part of the appliance is jg ar
the terminal 1 connected ?

(c) To which wire joined to 2 or 3, is the fuse
connected ?

Ans. (a) 1 > E,2 4 N,3 —L, (b) metal body, (c) 3

19.

20.

21.

22.

25.

What do you mean by the term local earthing ?
Explain how it is done.

To which wire is the metallic case of an electric
appliance connected ? Give the reason.

(a) The earthing of an electric appliance is useful
only if the fuse is in the live wire. Give the
reason.

(b) Name the part of the appliance which is earthed.
For earthing an electric appliance, one has to remove

the paint from the metallic body of the appliance where
the electric contact is made. Explain the reason.

. What is the colour code for the insulation on the

(a) live, (b) neutral, and (c) earth wire ?
Ans. (a) brown (b) blue (c) green

. How does the colour code of wires in a cable help

in house wiring ?

A power circuit uses a cable having three different

wires.

(a) Name the three wires of the cable.

(b) Between which of the two wires should the
heating element of an electric geyser be
connected ?

27.

29.

:

31,

(c) To which wire should the metallic case of the
geyser be connected ?
(d) To which wire should the switch and fuse be
connected ?
Ans. (a) live, neutral and earth (b) live and neutral
(c) earth (d) live

. State two circumstances when one may get an

electric shock from an electric gadget. What
preventive measure must be provided with the
gadget to avoid it ?

Why is it necessary to have an earth wire installed
in a power circuit, but not in a lighting circuit ?

. Give two characteristics of a high tension wire.

Which of the cables, one rated 5 A and the other
15 A will be of thicker wire ? Give a reason for your
answer.

{Hint : To carry heavy current, the resistance of

wire should be low, so its area of cross section
should be large]. Ans. 15 A cable

. The diagram in Fig. 9.28 shows three lamps and

three switches 1, 2 and 3 connected with two cells.

(a) Name the switch/switches to be closed so as to
light all the three lamps.

(b) How are then the lamps connected : in series or
in parallel ?

Ly

Fig. 9.28
Ans. (a) 2 and 3, (b) in series

Fig. 9.29 below shows two bulbs with switches and
fuse connected to the mains through a three pin
socket by means of a three wires cable.



===== PAGE 16 =====

(a)
)

(c)

Label each component — bulb, switch, fuse and | MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE

socket.

Name and state the colour of insulation of each
wire 1, 2 and 3.
How are the two bulbs joined : in series or in
parallel ?
Ans. (b) 1-neutral, blue, 2-earth, green,
3-live, brown (c) parallel

1.

2.

The rating of a fuse connected in the lighting circuit
is :

(a) ISA (b) SA

(c) 10A (d) zero. Ans. (b) 5A
A switch must be connected in the :

(a) live wire (b) neutral wire

(c) earth wire

(d) either earth or neutral wire.
Ans. (a) live wire.

