

===== PAGE 1 =====

& G | Seer

| SYLLABUS | LABUS

E triangular prism to produce a visible spectrum from white light; Electromagnetic spectrum. Scattering

‘Scope of syllabus : Deviation produced by a triangular prism; dependence on colour (wavelength) of light:
dispersion and spectrum; electromagnetic spectrum; broad classification (names only arranged in order of
increasing wavelength); properties common to all electromagnetic radiations; properties and uses of infrared and
ultraviolet radiations. Simple application of scattering of light e.g. blue colour of the sky.

(A) DEVIATION, DISPERSION AND SPECTRUM

6.1 DEVIATION PRODUCED BY A

TRIANGULAR PRISM

Fig. 6.1 shows the deviation produced by a
triangular prism. When a light ray PQ of single
colour enters a triangular prism ABC, it gets
deviated, say, by an angle 5, towards the base BC
at the first surface AB of the prism and travels
straight as QR inside the prism. The angle of
deviation 5, depends on the angle of incidence and
the refractive index of glass with respect to air. On
striking the second surface AC, the ray QR gets
further deviated, say, by an angle 6, towards the
base BC and travels straight as RS outside the
prism. The angle of deviation 5, depends on the
angle of incidence at the second surface (which
depends on the angle of the prism A) and the
refractive index of air with respect to glass. For the
emergent ray RS, the total deviation 5 with respect
to the incident ray PQ (i.e., the angle between the

Fig. 6.1 Deviation produced by a triangular prism

emergent ray RS and the direction PL of the
incident ray PQ) is given as :

The total angle of deviation 5, thus, depends
upon the following three factors :

(6.1)

(1) the angle of incidence (i) at the first surface,

(2) the angle of the prism (A), and

(3) the refractive index of the material of the
prism (1). But the refractive index depends
on the colour (or wavelength A) of the light
used, so the angle of deviation depends also
on the colour (or wavelength A) of the incident
light.

In chapter 4, we have discussed the
dependence of angle of deviation 5 on the angle
of incidence i, angle of prism A and refractive
index u of the material of prism. Here we shall
discuss in detail how the deviation 5 produced by
a prism depends on the colour (or wavelength )
of the incident light.

Dependence of deviation on the colour (or
wavelength) of light

The light of different colours have same speed
in air but different speeds in a medium. If the


===== PAGE 2 =====

light entering the prism is not of a single colour,
i.e, it is a mixture of several colours, then the
emergent beam also has different colours arranged
in a definite order. It is because the speed of light
in a transparent medium decreases with the
decrease in the wavelength of light. Therefore, the
refractive index of glass (the material of prism)
increases with the decrease in the wavelength of
light. Therefore the deviation caused by a prism
also increases with the decrease in the wavelength
of light*. In visible light, violet colour
(wavelength 2, = 4000 A) is deviated the most
and red colour (wavelength 4 = 8000 A) is
deviated the least because in glass, the speed of
violet light is least and that of the red light is
most.

6.2 COLOURS IN WHITE LIGHT WITH THEIR
WAVELENGTH AND FREQUENCY
RANGE

The white light emitted from a source consists
of light of different wavelengths. The light of
different wavelengths produce the sensation of
different colours on the retina of our eye, so we
perceive them as different colours. The prominent
colours in white light are violet, indigo, blue,
green, yellow, orange and red. Different colours
differ in their wavelength. In fact, wavelength is
the characteristic of colour, irrespective of its
origin i.e., the light of the same colour obtained
from different sources will have the same
wavelength. In other words, colour is the

* From the definition of refractive index

__Speed of light in air
Hetass = Speed of light in glass
The speed of light for different colours is same in air,
but it is different for different colours in glass (medium). In
glass, the speed of violet light is minimum and the speed of
red light is maximum. Therefore [yiojot > Hred
But p = sin i / sin r or sin r= sini/ uw
Therefore, in glass, for a given value of i. the angle of
refraction r is minimum for the light of violet colour and
maximum for the light of red colour i-e., roy > Tyioters

Now angle of deviation 5 = i — r, 80 8yicter > Sieg

subjective property of light related to its
wavelength.

The table below gives the range of wavelength
and frequency for light of different colours
present in the white light.

Wavelength and frequency of different colours in white light

Note : (1) In the above table the letter A
denotes the unit Angstrom where | A=10-m
(or 10-8 cm). Now a days the wavelength is
expressed mostly in nanometre (nm) where

1nm= 10° m=10 A.

(2) In the spectrum of white light, the red
colour has the longest wavelength 8000 A
(or 8 x 10-’m or 800 nm) or lowest frequency
3-75 x10!4 Hz and the violet colour has the
shortest wavelength 4000 A (or 4 x 10-7m or
400 nm) or highest frequency 7-5 x10!4 Hz.
From the violet end to the red end of the
spectrum, the wavelength increases while the
frequency decreases.

6.3 DISPERSION OF WHITE LIGHT
THROUGH A PRISM AND FORMATION
OF A SPECTRUM

Sir Isaac Newton, while studying the image of
a heavenly body formed due to refraction of
white light by a lens, found that the image is
coloured at its edges. He thought that the
coloured image is due to some defect of the lens.
He then repeated the experiment with a carefully
polished lens, but the image was still coloured.
Newton then concluded that the fault is not with
the lens, but there is something in the nature of
white light itself due to which the image is


===== PAGE 3 =====

coloured at its edges. To investigate it further, he
performed another experiment with a prism.

Newton’s Experiment

Newton allowed the white light from sun to
enter a dark room through a small aperture in a
window and placed a glass prism in the path of
light rays. The light emerging out of the prism
was received on a white screen. On the screen, a
coloured patch like a rainbow as shown in
Fig. 6.2 was obtained which was termed as
spectrum.

<-09<OD

w Fig. 6.2 Dispersion by a prism

Starting from the side of base of the prism,
the order of colours in the spectrum on screen
is:

Violet, Indigo, Blue, Green, Yellow, Orange,
and Red. This order of colours in the spectrum
can easily be remembered by the word
VIBGYOR.

Conclusion : From the above experiment,
Newton concluded that white light consists of
seven prominent colours. Each colour corresponds
to a small range of wavelength. Thus, white light
is a mixture of large number of wavelengths (i.e.,
it is polychromatic in nature).

Note : In the spectrum, each colour is
mixed with the other colour i.e., there is no
sharp boundary line separating the colours. In
diagram, colours are shown widely separated

just for clarity. The total spread of colours is
much less than that shown in the diagram.
Different colours have different width on the
screen.

Dispersion

Spectrum

Cause of dispersion of white light and
formation of spectrum

The cause of dispersion of white light is the
change in speed of light with wavelength. When
white light enters the first surface of a prism,
light of different colours due to their different
speeds in glass, gets deviated through different
angles towards the base of prism i.e. the
dispersion (or splitting) of white light into its
constituent colours takes place at the first surface
of prism. The violet colour is deviated the most,
while the red colour is deviated the least.
Therefore light of different colours follow
different paths in glass and then strikes the second
surface of prism. On the second surface of prism,
only refraction takes place (from glass to air) and
different colours are deviated through different
angles, i.e., violet is deviated the most and red
the least. As a result, the colours get further
separated on refraction at the second surface. The
light emerging out of the prism, thus, has
different colours that spread out to form a
spectrum on the screen.

Note : (1) Dispersion of white light occurs
at the first surface of prism.

(2) Deviation of light occurs at both the
surfaces of prism.

(3) The prism does not produce colours,
but it only splits the various colours present in
the light incident on it.



===== PAGE 4 =====

1. Fig. 6.3 shows the light (blue + red + green)
incident on a prism and on a parallel sided glass
slab. Complete the diagrams by drawing the
refracted and the emergent rays.

Fig.6.3

The completed ray diagrams are shown in
Fig. 6.4.

In a prism, the refraction takes place at two inclined
surfaces, so the prism causes dispersion and deviation of
light into its constituent colours and a spectrum is seen.

In case of the parallel sided glass slab, the refraction
takes place at two parallel surfaces. On the first surface,
the colours are separated due to different deviation for the
rays of different colours i.e., dispersion takes place. On
the second surface, the ray of each colour is refracted
such that the emergent ray is parallel to the incident ray
on the first surface. Since there is no further separation of
colours due to refraction at the second surface (as it is in
case of the prism), so the emergent coloured rays are
parallel to each other and they are so close that it is
difficult to see the separate colours and the emergent light
appears to be almost white (= blue + red + green).

BLUE
+ RED

RED
GREEN
BLUE RED
BLUE GREEN
(a) (b)
Fig. 6.4

2. A beam consisting of red, blue and yellow colours
is incident normally on the face AB of an
isosceles right angled prism ABC as shown in
Fig. 6.5. Complete the diagram to show the

refracted and the emergent rays. Given that the
critical angle of glass-air interface for yellow
colour is 45°.

A

RED + BLUE + YELLOW

Fig. 6.5

The completed diagram is shown in Fig. 6.6. The
beam is incident normally (Z i = 0°) on the face AB, it
passes without deviation (2 r = 0°) for all colours and
with no dispersion. Now the refracted beam inside the
prism, strikes the face AC at an angle of incidence equal
to 45°. Since the critical angle for yellow colour at the
glass-air interface is 45°, so the yellow colour suffers
refraction along the face AC of the prism (Z r = 90°).

The critical angle for the light of red colour will be
more than 45° (since sin C = iz and pp < py), so the
light of red colour is incident on the face AC at an angle
less than the critical angle for red colour. The red colour
is, therefore, refracted out of the prism obeying the laws
of refraction, i.e., it bends away from the normal at the
face AC so the emergent ray bends towards the base of
the prism.

A

RED + BLUE + YELLOW

Fig. 6.6

Now the critical angle for the light of blue colour will
be less than 45° since 1, > py, so the light of blue colour
is incident on the glass-air surface AC at an angle of
incidence greater than the critical angle for blue colour.
Therefore, the light of blue colour suffers total internal
reflection and strikes normally on the base BC of the
prism. It then emerges out of the prism without deviation.
Thus blue colour emerges out of the prism at right angle
to its incident direction.


===== PAGE 5 =====

3;

(a) Draw a diagram to show the path of beam till

(b

(c

(a)

1.

) What assumption have you made while

~

A beam of white light is incident normally on the
surface AB of an equilateral prism ABC and
emerges out of it suffering a deviation of 60°.

it emerges out of the prism. Mark the angles
wherever necessary.

drawing the diagram ?

Name the phenomenon exhibited by the light
beam.

The ray diagram is shown in Fig. 6.7.

The beam of white light incident normally on the
face AB of the prism passes undeviated inside the
prism and strikes the other face AC at an angle of
incidence of 60°. At the face AC, it suffers total
internal reflection. After total internal reflection at

Name three factors on which the deviation produced
by a prism depends and state how does it depend on
the factors stated by you.
How does the deviation produced by a triangular
prism depend on the colours (or wavelengths) of
light incident on it ?
How does the speed of light in glass change on
increasing the wavelength of light ?

Ans. Speed of light increases with increase

in its wavelength.

Which colour of white light travels (a) fastest
(b) slowest, in glass ? Ans. (a) red (b) blue

Name the subjective property of light related to its
wavelength. Ans. colour

What is the range of wavelength of the spectrum of
white light in (i) A, (ii) nm ?

Ans. (i) 4000 A to 8000 A

(ii) 400 nm to 800 nm

5.

the face AC, the beam of light falls normally on
the face BC, so it emerges out without deviation.

(b) Assumption : The critical angle of glass-air

interface is less than 60° for all colours of white
light.

(c) Phenomenon : Total internal reflection.
4.

The frequency of violet light is 7-5 x 10!4 Hz.
Find its wavelength in (i) nm, (ii) A. Speed of
light c = 3 x 108 ms",

Given : f = 7-5 x 104 Hz,c=3 x 10° ms".

f

From relation c = fA, wavelength A =
3x10°

75x10"
(i) Since 1 nm = 10° m, «. A= 400 nm

or A= =4x107m.

(ii) Since 1 A= 10-9 m, ». 4 = 4000 A

The wavelength of red light is 800 nm. Find its
frequency. Speed of light = 3 x 108 ms“.

Given : A = 800 nm = 800 x 109 m=8 x 107m
c=3x 10 ms"!

Form relation c = fa, frequency f = :
3x108
= —— =}: 4
or f exo? ee 10" Hz.

7. Write the approximate wavelengths for (i) blue, and

(ii) red light. Ans. (i) 4800 A, (ii) 8000 A

Write the seven prominent colours present in white
light in the order of increasing wavelength

Ans. violet, indign, blue, green, yellow, orange, and red.
9. Name the seven prominent colours of the

12.

white light spectrum in order of their increasing
frequencies.

Ans. red, orange, yellow, green,

blue, indigo, and violet.

. Name four colours of the spectrum of white light

which have wavelength longer than blue light.
Ans. green, yellow, orange, and red

. Which colour of the white light is deviated by a

glass prism (i) the most, and (ii) the least ?

The wavelengths for the light of red and blue
colours are nearly 7-8 x 10-7 m and 4-8 x 10-7 m
respectively.


===== PAGE 6 =====

13.
14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.

(a) Which colour has the greater speed in vacuum ?

(b) Which colour has the greater speed in glass ?
Ans. (a) In vacuum, both have the same speeds.
(b) In glass, red light has a greater speed.

Define the term dispersion of light.

Explain the cause of dispersion of white light
through a prism.

Explain briefly, with the help of a neat labelled
diagram, how does white light get dispersed by a
prism.

On which surface of prism, there is both the
dispersion and deviation of light, and on which
surface of prism, there is only the deviation of
light ?

What do you understand by the term spectrum ?

A ray of white light is passed through a glass prism
and spectrum is obtained on a screen.
(a) Name the seven colours of the spectrum in order.
(b) Do the colours have the same width in the
spectrum ?
(c) Which of the colour of the spectrum of white
light deviates (i) the most, (ii) the least ?
The diagram shown below in Fig. 6.8 shows the
path taken by a narrow beam of yellow
monochromatic light passing through an equiangular
glass prism. It the yellow light is replaced by a
narrow beam of white light incident at the same
angle, draw another diagram to show the passage of
white light through the prism and label it to show
the effect of prism on the white light.

Fig. 6.8

Fig. 6.9 shows a thin beam of white light from a
source § striking on one face of a prism.

KS

Ww
So\ PRISM
Fig. 6.9

(a) Complete the diagram to show the effect of prism
on the beam and to show what is seen on the

SCREEN

screen.

(b) If a slit is placed in between a prism and a screem
to pass only the light of green colour, what will
you then observe on the screen ?

(c) What conclusion do you draw from the
observation in part (b) above ?

20. (a) A beam of monochromatic light undergoes

minimum deviation through an equiangular prism,
how does the beam pass through the prism, with
respect to its base ?

(b) If white light is used in same way as in
part (a) above, what change do you expect in the
emergent beam ?

(c) What conclusion do you draw about the nature of
white light in part (b) ?

Ans. (a) parallel to the base, (b) white light splits into
its constituent colours i.e., spectrum is formed
(c) white light is polychromatic

MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE

1

3.

. When a white light ray falls on a prism, the ray at
its first surface suffers :

(a) no refraction
(b) only dispersion
(c) only deviation
(d) both deviation and dispersion.
Ans. (d) both deviation and dispersion.

In the spectrum of white light by a prism, the
colour at the extreme end opposite to the base of
prism is :
(a) violet
(c) red

(b) yellow
(d) blue.
Ans. (c) red
The wavelength range of white light is :
(a) 4000 nm to 8000 nm
(b) 40 nm to 80 nm
(c) 400 nm to 800 nm
(d) 4.nm to 8 nm.

Ans. (c) 400 nm to 800 nm

NUMERICALS

1.

2.

Calculate the frequency of yellow light of wavelength
550 nm. The speed of light is 3 x 108 m s“!.

Ans. 5-4 x 10!4 Hz

The frequency range of visible light is from

3-75 x 10'4 Hz to 7-5 x 10! Hz. Calculate its

wavelength range. Take speed of light = 3 x 108 m s“!.

Ans. 4000 A to 8000 A



===== PAGE 7 =====

bit eo

6.4 ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM

Classification : Till now we have limited
ourselves to the spectrum which lies between the
red and the violet regions. This spectrum is the
visible spectrum and it is only a very small
part of the entire electromagnetic spectrum.
Experiments show that the spectrum of sun light
is limited not only between the violet and red
extremes, but it extends on either side beyond
these extremes to which our eyes do not respond.
This part of spectrum beyond the red and
the violet extremes is called the invisible
spectrum*.

The waves of wavelength longer than the red
part of the visible spectrum in increasing order of
wavelength are (i) infrared radiations,
(ii) microwaves, and (iii) radio waves, while the
waves of wavelength shorter than the violet part
of the visible spectrum in decreasing order of
wavelength are : (i) ultraviolet rays, (ii) X-rays,
and (iii) gamma rays. These radiations together
form the electromagnetic spectrum.

aa

102 10 400 800

Ultra
violet

3 x 1016

7-5 x 104
3-75 x 104

3 x 10"

These electromagnetic waves are of different
wavelengths, but they have properties similar to
the light waves. Each wave travels with same
speed equal to 3 x 108 m s~! in vacuum (or air).

The speed (c), frequency (f) and wavelength (A)
of the electromagnetic waves are related as :

veue(6.2)

The complete electromagnetic spectrum is
shown in Fig. 6.10 with the wavelength
increasing towards the right side (or frequency
increasing towards the left side).

Wavelength in nm ——»
10° 10°

Microwave

Radio waves

3 x 107

+— Frequency in Hz

Fig. 6.10 Electromagnetic spectrum

Note : (1) In Fig. 6.10, although we have shown the boundary line in each part, but there is
no sharp boundary of wavelength (or frequency) between the two successive kind of
electromagnetic waves. In fact, they overlap to a good extent.

(2) The infrared spectrum is the part of spectrum just beyond the red end, while the ultraviolet
spectrum is the part of spectrum just before the violet end.

* The portion of electromagnetic spectrum other than the visible part, do not excite our retina to produce the sensation of
po gn pect Pi

vision, but a part of it can damage the retina.


===== PAGE 8 =====

The table below shows different waves of the electromagnetic spectrum in order of their increasing

wavelengths alongwith their discoverer, source and

Electromagnetic spectrum

method of detection.

Name of the wave | Wavelengthinnm | Discoverer | Source Method of detection

Gamma rays | below 0-01 Becquerel | In cosmic rays, from radioactive By their large penetrating power

| | & Curie substances.

| X-rays 0-01 — 1-0 Roentgen Front a heavy metal target of high | By the fluorescence produced on a zinc
| | | melting point when highly energetic) sulphide screen. The photographic film

| | | electrons are stopped by it. gets affected.
| Ultraviolet 1-0 - 400 | Ritter Sunlight, arc-lamp, spark By their chemical activity on dyes.
| Photographic plates get affected.
It causes fluorescence.

Visible light 400 — 800 | Newton Sunlight, light from electric bulb, | Other objects can be seen in its presence.
| flame, white hot bodies.
| Infrared waves 800 — 106 Hershell | Lamp with thoriated filament, Heating effect is more. The mercury rises

heated silicon carbide rod, rapidly when a thermometer with the

| | red hot bodies blackened bulb is kept in these radiations.
| Microwaves 10° — 10'° Hertz Electronic devices such as Oscillatory electrical circuit.
crystal oscillators
| Radio waves above 10!0 Marconi | TV and radio transmitters Aerials of radio and TV receiver.

(1) Gamma rays—wavelength shorter than 0-1 A
(or } < 0-01 nm) or frequency above
10'9 Hz.
X-rays—wavelength range 0-1 Ato 100A
(or A = 0-01 nm to 10 nm) or frequency
from 3 x 10'9 to 3 x 10!6 Hz.
Ultraviolet rays—wavelength range 100 A to
4000 A (or 4 = 10 nm to 400 nm) or
frequency from 3 x 10!® to 7-5 x 10'4 Hz.
Visible light-wavelength range 4000 A to
g000 A (or 4 = 400 nm to 800 nm) or
frequency from 7-5 x 10! to 3-75 x 10!4 Hz.
Infrared radiations—wavelength range 8000 A
to 107 A (or A= 800 nm to 1 mm) or frequency
from 3-75 x 10!4 to 3 x 10"! Hz.
Microwaves-wavelength range 107 A to 10!" A
(or A = 1 mm to 10 m) or frequency from
3 x 10!! to 3 x 107 Hz.
(7) Radio waves—wavelength above 10!! A
(or 4 > 10 m) or frequency below 3 x 107 Hz.

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

cti

(1) Electromagnetic waves do not require any
material medium for their propagation.

(2) They all travel with the same speed in
a medium e.g. in vacuum (or air) speed is
3x 108 ms",

They exhibit the properties of reflection
and refraction. In refraction, when an electro-
magnetic wave passes from one medium to
the other, there is change in its direction of
travel, speed and wavelength, but its
frequency remains unchanged.

(3)

(4)

These waves are not deflected by the electric
and magnetic fields.

These waves are transverse waves.

(5)

These are the most energetic electromagnetic
radiations of wavelength less than 0-1 A (or
0-01 nm).

They are obtained in emissions
from the radioactive substances due to energy
change in the nucleus of their atoms. They are
also present in cosmic radiations.

Like X-rays, they cause
fluorescence when they strike the fluorescent
materials such as zinc sulphide. They can easily



===== PAGE 9 =====

penetrate through the thick metallic sheets (even
30 cm thick iron sheet). Gamma radiations easily
pass through human body and cause immense
biological damage.

Uses : They are used in medical science to
kill cancer cells (i.e., radio therapy) and in
industry to check welding.

(2) X-rays .

X-rays are given out from a heavy metal
target of high melting point when highly energetic
cathode rays are stopped by it. They have

wavelength in the range of 0-1 A to 100 A (or
0-01 nm to 10 nm).

Properties : X-rays are chemically more
active than the ultraviolet radiations. They
strongly affect the photographic plate. Like
gamma rays, they cause fluorescence in certain
materials such as zinc sulphide, etc. They can
penetrate through human flesh, but they are
stopped by bones.

Uses : They are used for the detection of
fracture in bones, teeth, etc. (i.e., radiography),
and for diagonistic purposes such as CAT scan in
medical science. X-rays are also used for studying
atomic arrangement in crystals as well as in
complex molecules. X-rays are used by the
detective agencies to detect the concealed precious
metals.

(3) Ultraviolet radiations

The electromagnetic radiations of wavelength
from 100 A to 4000 A (or 10 nm to 400 nm)
are called the ultraviolet radiations. The ultraviolet
part of the spectrum was first detected by
Prof. J. Ritter in 1801.

Detection : (i) If silver-chloride solution is
exposed to the electromagnetic waves starting
from the red to the violet end and then beyond
it, it is observed that from the red to the violet
end, the solution remains almost unaffected. But
just beyond the violet end, the solution first turns
violet and finally it becomes dark brown (or
black). It shows that there exist certain radiations

nei |

beyond the violet extreme of the visible part,
which are chemically more active than the visible
light. These radiations are called the ultraviolet
radiations (or actinic rays).

(ii) The ultraviolet radiations can be detected
by their chemical activity on dyes and
photographic plates.

(iii) The spectrum of ultraviolet radiations is
obtained when they are passed through a quartz
prism in place of a glass prism because glass
absorbs these radiations. ‘

Sources of ultraviolet radiations : The electric
arc and sparks give ultraviolet radiations. A
mercury vapour lamp emits radiations, a part of
which has ultraviolet radiations along with the
visible light. Sun is also a source of ultraviolet
radiations, but a large fraction of it is absorbed
by the ozone layer in the upper atmosphere*
which protects us from its harmful effect.

Properties of ultraviolet radiations

(i) Ultraviolet radiations can pass through
quartz, but they are absorbed by glass.
Therefore to obtain the ultraviolet
spectrum from its source, a quartz prism
is used instead of a glass prism. For the
same reason the ultraviolet bulbs have the
envelope made of quartz instead of glass.

(ii) These radiations travel in a straight line

with a speed of 3 x 108 ms" in air (or

vacuum).

(iii) They are usually scattered by the dust

particles present in the atmosphere.

(iv) They obey the laws of reflection and
refraction.
(v) They strongly affect the photographic

plate as they are chemically more active
than the visible light.
They produce fluorescence on striking a
zinc-sulphide screen.

(vi)

* Due to large pollution, there is depletion of ozone layer which is
dangerous for us because our exposure to ultraviolet radiations is
harmful to us.


===== PAGE 10 =====

Harmful effect of ultraviolet radiations |

The ultraviolet radiations cause health hazards
like skin cancer if human body is exposed to
them for a long period.

Uses of ultraviolet radiations

Ultraviolet radiations are used for the
following purposes :

(a) For sterilising purposes.

(b) For detecting the purity of gems, eggs,
ghee, etc.

(c) In producing vitamin D in food of plants
and animals.

(4) Visible light

The electromagnetic radiations of wavelength
from 4000 A to 8000 A are called visible
radiations (or visible light) because in the
presence of these radiations, other objects are
seen by us. The visible part of spectrum was
discovered by Newton while passing the sun
light through a prism. The prominent colours of
visible light are violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow,
orange and red.

Sources : The sun, electric bulb, flame and
white hot bodies are the main sources of visible
light.

Uses : The visible light is used in photography,
in photosynthesis and to see the objects around
us.

(5) Infrared radiations

These are the electromagnetic waves of
wavelength in the range of 8000 A to 107 A
(or 800 nm to 1 mm). The infrared part of the
spectrum was first detected by William Hershell
in about 1800.

Detection : (i) If a thermometer having its
bulb blackened, is moved from the violet end
towards the red end of the spectrum of visible
light, it is observed that there is a very slow rise
in temperature. But when this thermometer is
moved beyond the red extreme, a rapid rise in
temperature is noticed. Jt means that the vart of

ee S

spectrum beyond the red extreme of the visible
light has certain radiations which produce a
strong heating effect, but they are not visible.
These radiations are called the infrared (or heat)
radiations.

(ii) A thermopile can also be used to detect
the heat radiations. The galvanometer connected
with the thermopile shows deflection when
infrared radiations fall on the thermopile.

(iii) The spectrum of infrared radiations is
obtained by using a rock-salt prism because the
rock-salt prism does not absorb the infrared
radiations, whereas a glass prism absorbs them.

Sources of infrared radiations : All red hot
bodies such as a heated iron ball, flame, fire, etc.
are the sources of infrared radiations. The sun is
the natural source of infrared radiations.

Properties of infrared radiations
(i) They travel in straight lines like light, with
a speed equal to 3 x 108 m s™ in vacuum
(or air).

(ii) They obey the laws of reflection and

refraction.

If a source of heat (say, an infrared lamp)

is placed at the focus of a parabolic mirror,

a parallel infrared beam is obtained.

A burning glass (i.e., a convex lens) focuses

the infrared radiations of short wavelengths

obtained from the sun on a paper due to
which the paper chars (or burns).

They do not affect the ordinary

photographic film. However, a specially

treated photographic film is affected by
them.

They are absorbed by glass, but they pass

through the rock-salt.

(v) They are detected by their heating property
using a blackened bulb thermometer or a
thermopile.

(vi) They are scattered less by the atmosphere
because of their long wavelength (since
intensity of scattered radiation < 1/A4).

(iii)

(iv)


===== PAGE 11 =====

Hence they can penetrate deep in

atmosphere even in fog.

£ attant vf i

A high dose of infrared radiations may cause
skin burns.
(a) The infrared radiations are used for
therapeutic purposes by doctors.
They are used in photography at night and
also in mist and fog because they are not
much scattered, so they can penetrate
appreciably through it.
Infrared lamps are used in dark rooms for
developing photographs as they provide
some visibility without affecting the
photographic film.
They are used as signals during war as
they are not visible and they are not
absorbed much in the medium.
They are used in remote control of
television and other gadgets.

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

: Ultraviolet radiations

"Visible radiations

The microwaves have wavelength in the
range of 107 A to 10! A (or 1 mm to 10 m)
or frequency in the range of 3 x 10!! Hz to
3 x 10’ Hz.

These waves are produced by the
electronic devices such as the crystal oscillators.

They are used for satellite
communication, for analysis of atomic and
molecular structure, for cooking in microwave-
ovens and in radar communication.

These are the waves of longest wavelength
amongst all the electromagnetic waves. They have
wavelength above 10 m (or 10!'A) or frequency

below 3 x 107 Hz. They show all the properties
of the electromagnetic waves.

: These waves are used mainly in radar
communication and ‘also in radio and television
transmission.

INFRARED RADIATIONS

anal saan |

Be They ‘have wavelength in the range | 1.

of 100 A to 4000 A.

They are invisible.

They produce no heating effect.
They affect the photographic plate.
They cause fluorescence on zinc

re ES.

wRwY

. They are visible.

They have wavelength in the range of 1.

4000 A to 8000 A.

They produce slight heating effect.
They affect the photographic plate.
They do not cause fluorescence.

Ut WN

They have wavelength in the range of
8000 A to 107 A.

. They are invisible.

. They produce strong heating effect.

. They do not affect the photographic plate. |
. They do not cause fluorescence. |

sulphide screen.

6. They cause health hazards like 6.
skin cancer.

7. They can pass through quartz but | 7.
they do not pass through glass.

(a) Give a list of at least five radiations, in the order
of their increasing wavelength, which make up
the complete electromagnetic spectrum.

(b) Name the radiation mentioned by you in part (a)
which has the highest penetrating power.

(a) Arrange the following radiations in the order of
their increasing wavelength :

They do not affect the body.

The can pass through glass. ie

EXERCISE-6(B)

. They do not affect the body, but high |
dose may cause skin burns.

They can pass through rock-salt, but
they do not pass through glass.

an

X-rays, infrared rays, radio waves, gamma rays,
and micro waves.
(b) Name the radiation which is used for satellite
communication.
(a) gamma rays, X-rays, infrared rays,
micro waves, and radio waves. (b) micro waves


===== PAGE 12 =====

10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

1S,

16.

A wave has a wavelength 10-3 nm. (a) Name the
wave. (b) State its one property different from light.

Ans. (a) gamma ray, (b) strong penetrating power

A wave has wavelength 50 A. (a) Name the wave.
(b) State its speed in vacuum. (c) State its one use.
Ans. (a) X-ray, (c) 3 x 108 ms!

(d) in detection of fracture in bones

(a) Name the high energetic invisible electro-
magnetic wave which helps in the study of
structure of crystals.

(b) State one more use of the wave named in
part (a).

Ans. (a) X-rays, (b) to detect fracture in bones
State the name and the range of wavelength of the
invisible electromagnetic waves beyond the red end
of visible spectrum.

Name three radiations and their wavelength range
which are invisible and beyond the violet end of the
visible spectrum.

Give the range of wavelength of the electromagnetic
waves visible to us. Ans. 4000 A to 8000 A

Name the region just beyond (i) the red end, and
(ii) the violet end, of the spectrum.

Ans. (i) infrared (ii) ultraviolet
What do you understand by the invisible spectrum ?

Name the radiation which can be detected by (a) a
thermopile (b) a solution of silver chloride.
Ans. (a) infrared radiation (b) ultra violet radiation

State the approximate range of wavelength
associated with (a) the ultraviolet rays, (b) the
visible light, and (c) infrared rays.
Name the radiations of wavelength just (a) longer
than 8 x 10-7 m, (b) shorter than 4 x 1077 m.

Ans. (a) infrared (b) ultraviolet

Name two electromagnetic waves of wavelength
smaller than that of violet light. State one use of
each.

Give one use each of (a) microwaves, (b) ultraviolet
radiations, (c) infrared radiations, and (d) gamma
rays.

Name the waves (a) of lowest wavelength, (b) used

for taking photographs in dark, (c) produced by the

changes in the nucleus of an atom, (d) of wavelength
nearly 0-1 nm.

Ans. (a) gamma rays (b) infrared rays,

(c) gamma rays (d) X-rays

17.

18.

19.

21.

22.

Two waves A and B have wavelength 0-01 A and
9000 A respectively.
(a) Name the two waves.
(b) Compare the speeds of these waves when they
travel in vacuum.
Ans. (a) A-gamma, B-infrared, (b) 1: 1
Name two sources, each of infrared radiations and
ultraviolet radiations.

What are infrared radiations ? How are they
detected ? State one use of these radiations.

. What are ultraviolet radiations ? How are they

detected ? State one use of these radiations.

Name three properties of ultraviolet radiations which
are similar to the visible light.

Give two properties of ultraviolet radiations which
differ from the visible light.

23. Mention three properties of infrared radiations

similar to the visible light.

24. Give two properties of infrared radiations which

27.

differ front the visible light.

Name the material of prism required for obtaining
the spectrum of (a) ultraviolet light, (b) infrared
radiations. Ans. (a) quartz (b) rock salt
State one harmful effect each of the (a) ultraviolet
and (b) infrared radiations.
Give reason for the following :
(i) Infrared radiations are used for photography in
fog.
(ii) Infrared radiations are used for signals during
war.
(iii) The photographic darkrooms are provided with
infrared lamps.
(iv) A rock salt prism is used instead of a glass prism
to obtain the infrared spectrum.
(v) A quartz prism is required for obtaining the
spectrum of the ultraviolet light.
(vi) Ultraviolet bulbs have a quartz envelope instead
of glass.

MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE

1.

The most energetic electromagnetic radiations are :
(a) microwaves (b) ultraviolet waves
(c) X-rays (d) gamma rays.

Ans. (d) gamma rays


===== PAGE 13 =====

2. The source of ultraviolet light is :
(a) electric bulb (b) red hot iron ball
(c) sodium vapour lamp (d) carbon arc-lamp.
Ans. (d) carbon arc-lamp
3. A radiation P is focused by a proper device on the
bulb of a thermometer. Mercury in the thermometer
shows a rapid increase. The radiation P is :

(a) infrared radiation (b) visible light
(c) ultraviolet radiation

(d) X-rays. Ans. (a) infrared radiation

NUMERICALS

1. An electromagnetic wave has a frequency of
500 MHz and a wavelength of 60 cm.

(a) Calculate the speed of the wave.

(b) Name the medium through which it is travelling.
Ans. (a) 3 x 108 ms“, (b) air
2. The wavelength of X-rays is 0-01 A. Calculate its
frequency. State the assumption made, if any.
Ans. 3 x 102° Hz
Assumption : Speed of X rays = 3 x 10° ms“.

6.7 SCATTERING OF LIGHT

When light from sun enters the earth’s
atmosphere, it gets scattered (i.e., the light spreads
in all directions) by the dust particles and air
molecules present in the atmosphere. The path of
sun light entering a dark room through a fine hole
is seen because of scattering of the sun light by
the dust particles present in its path inside the
room. The scattering of light was first studied by
the scientist Rayleigh.

The air molecules of size smaller than the
wavelength of incident light absorb the energy of
incident light and then re-emit it without change in
its wavelength. The scattering of light is not same
for all wavelengths of incident light. The intensity
of scattered light is found to be inversely
proportional to the fourth power of wavelength of
light (i.e., Ie 1/A*). The wavelength of violet light
is least (~ 4000 A) and that of red light is most
(= 8000 A), therefore from the incident white light,
violet light is scattered most and the red light is
scattered least (violet light is scattered nearly
16 times more than the red light). As a result, the
light from sun when reaches on earth surface, has
less intensity of the light of violet end (such as
blue, indigo and violet) and more intensity of light
of the red end (such as orange and red). However

the air molecules of size bigger than the
wavelength of incident light, scatter the light of all
wavelengths of white light to the same extent.

6.8 SOME APPLICATIONS OF SCATTERING

Some effects of scattering of sunlight by the
earth’s atmosphere are : (1) red colour of sun at
sunrise and sunset, (2) white colour of sky at
noon, (3) blue colour of sky, (4) black colour of
sky in the absence of atmosphere, (5) white
colour of clouds, and (6) use of red light for the
danger signal.

(1) Red colour of sun at sunrise and sunset

At the time of sunrise and sunset, the light
from sun has to travel the longest distance of
atmosphere to reach the observer. Since the blue
light of short wavelength is scattered more, much
of it is lost, while the red light of long
wavelength is scattered a little, so it is not much
lost. Thus blue light is almost absent in sunlight
reaching the observer and only the red (white —
blue = red) light reaches us. As a result, the sun

Scattered blue light

Observer

Scattered blue light:

Earth’s
atmosphere

Fig. 6.11 Red colour of sun at sunrise and sunset


===== PAGE 14 =====

and the region near by it, is seen red. Fig. 6.11
shows the scattering of blue light.

(2) White colour of sky at noon

At noon, sun is directly above our head, so
we get the light rays directly from sun after
travelling the shortest distance, without much
scattering of any particular colour. Hence the sky
is seen white.

(3) Blue colour of sky

The light from sun has to travel a long
distance of the earth’s atmosphere before reaching
us. As light travels through the atmosphere, it gets
scattered in different directions by the air
molecules present in its path. The blue (or violet)
light due to its short wavelength is scattered more
as compared to the red light of long wavelength.
Thus the light reaching our eye directly from sun
is rich in red colour, while the light reaching our
eye from all other directions is the scattered blue
light. Therefore the sky in direction, other than
the direction of sun, is seen blue. Further after
the sunset and before the sunrise, there is no
sunlight reaching directly to us. Then the blue
scattered light makes the entire sky to appear
blue.

(4) Black colour of sky in absence of
atmosphere

If there would have been no atmosphere,
there would be no scattering of light and no
scattered light would reach our eyes and thus the
sky will appear black (instead of blue).

Since there is no atmosphere on moon
therefore no scattered sunlight reaches the moon’s
surface. Hence to an observer on the surface of
moon, no light reaches the eyes of the observer

except the light reaching directly from the sun.
Thus the sky in direction other than that of the
sun will appear black to an observer on the
moon’s surface.

Similarly when an astronaut goes above the
atmosphere of the earth in a rocket, he sees the
sky black, but to him the earth appears blue due
to the blue colour of sunlight scattered by the
earth’s atmosphere, reaching him. The stars and
other heavenly bodies are seen as usual, but
without twinkling.

(5) White colour of clouds

The clouds are nearer the earth surface and
they contain dust particles and aggregates of
water molecules of size bigger than the
wavelength of visible light. Therefore, the dust
particles and tiny ice particles present in clouds
scatter all colours of incident white light from sun
to the same extent and hence when the scattered
light reaches our eyes, the clouds are seen white.

(6) Use of red light for the danger signal

In the visible light, the wavelength of red light
is longest, therefore the light of red colour is
scattered least by the air molecules of the
atmosphere. Hence the light of red colour as
compared to the light of other colours can
penetrate to a longer distance without becoming
weak. Thus red light can be seen from the farthest
distance in comparison to the light of other
colours having the same intensity. Hence red
light is used for danger signal so that the signal
may be visible from the far distance even in fog,
etc. Similarly remote control of electrical gadgets
(like T.V. etc) also make use of the infrared
radiations.

1. What is meant by scattering of light ?

2. How does the intensity of scattered light depend on
the wavelength of incident light ? State the condition
when this dependence hold.

=

3. When sunlight enters the earth’s atmosphere, state
which colour of light is scattered (i) the most, and
(ii) the least.

Ans. (i) violet (ii) red.


===== PAGE 15 =====

A bean of blue, green and yellow light passes
through the earth’s atmosphere. Name the colour
which is scattered (a) the least, (b) the most.
Ans. (a) yellow (b) blue

Which colour of white light is scattered the least ?
Give reason.
Ans. red because wavelength of red light is longest

and intensity of scattered light I  1/A4.
The danger signal is red. Why ?
How would the sky appear when seen from the
space (or moon) ? Give reason for your answer.
What characteristic property of light is responsible
for the blue colour of sky ? Ans. scattering

The colour of sky, in direction other than of the sun,
is blue. Explain.

10. Why does the sun appear red at sunrise and

11.

sunset ?
The sky at noon appears white. Give reason.

12. The clouds are seen white. Explain.

MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE

i a

2.

In the white light of sun, maximum scattering by
the air molecules present in the earth’s atmosphere

is for :
(a) red colour (b) yellow colour
(d) blue colour.

Ans. (d) blue colour.

(c) green colour

To an astronaut in a space-ship, the earth appears :
(a) white
(c) blue

(b) red

(d) black Ans. (c) blue

as
st
WN

