

===== PAGE 1 =====

SYLLABUS

(i) Reflection of sound waves; echoes, their use; simple numerical problems on echoes.
Scope of syllabus : Production of echoes, condition for formation of echoes; simple numerical problems; use of
echoes by bats, dolphins, fishermen, medical field. SONAR.

(ii) Natural vibrations, damped vibrations, forced vibration and resonance — a special case of forced vibrations.
Scope of syllabus : Meaning and simple applications of natural, damped, forced vibrations and resonance.

(iii) Loudness, pitch and quality of sound.

Scope of syllabus : Characteristics of sound; loudness and intensity; subjective and objective nature of these
properties; sound level in dB (as unit only); noise pollution; inter dependence of pitch and frequency, quality

and waveforms (with examples).

7.1 SOUND WAVES

In class IX, we have read that sound is
produced when a body vibrates and it reaches us
through the vibrations of the particles of
surrounding medium. Thus sound requires a
medium for its propagation. The vibrations of the
body produce vibrations in the particles of
surrounding medium which travel in form of
waves with a certain speed depending upon the
density and elasticity of the medium. When these
vibrations reach our ear, the sound is heard. Our
ears are sensitive only to a limited range of
frequencies from 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz. This range
of frequency is, therefore, called the range of
audibility. However, the audibility range of a
person decreases as he gets older since the hearing
sensitivity of ears falls for both the low and
high frequencies. The sound of frequency above
20,000 Hz is called the ultrasonic, while the sound
of frequency below 20 Hz is called the infrasonic.
Both the ultrasonic and infrasonic are inaudible to
human beings, but they both travel in a medium
with the speed same as that of the audible sound.

When sound wave travels in a medium, the
maximum displacement of the particle of medium
on either side of its mean position, is called the
amplitude (a) of the wave. The time taken by the
particle of medium to complete its one vibration,
is called the time period (T) of the wave. The
number of vibrations made by the particle of the
medium in one second, is called the frequency (f)
of the wave. The frequency of a wave is same as
the frequency of the source producing it. The
distance travelled by a wave in one time period
of vibration of the particle of the medium, is called
the wavelength (A). The distance travelled by the
wave in one second is called the wave velocity (V).
The wave velocity V, frequency f and wavelength A
are related as :

esi 1)

The time period of wave T and its frequency f
are related as :

(7.2)



===== PAGE 2 =====

Note : The frequency (or time period) of wave
depends on the vibrating source producing the
sound, while the velocity of wave and hence
its wavelength depends on the properties of the
medium in which the wave travels.

The sound waves necessarily require a
medium for their propagation. The transfer of
energy by waves is through the vibrations of the
medium particles about their mean positions.
When the medium particles vibrate, there is a
change of kinetic energy into the potential energy
and vice versa, so sound waves are also called the
elastic or mechanical waves. The mechanical
waves are of two kinds : (1) longitudinal waves,
and (2) transverse waves. If the vibrations of
medium particles are along the direction of
propagation of the wave, thus forming
compressions and rarefactions in the medium, the
wave is called a longitudinal wave e.g. sound
waves in air, in solid and inside a liquid. The
longitudinal waves can travel in solid, liquid as
well as gas. On the other hand, if the medium
particles vibrate normal to the direction of
propagation of the wave, forming crests and
troughs, the wave is called a transverse wave e.g.
sound waves in a solid and on the surface of a
liquid. Transverse waves are formed only in those
media which possess rigidity and that is why they
can travel only in solids and on the surface of a
liquid.

The speed V of a longitudnal wave (i.e., sound)
in a gaseous medium of density d at a pressure P

~ - vez

where y (the ratio of two specific heats) is 1-4
for air.

Since the density of gas decreases with the
increase in temperature and with the increase in
humidity in it, so the speed of sound increases
with the increase in temperature* and with the
presence of humidity in the gas. However the

(7.3)

* For 1°C rise in temperature, the speed of sound in air
increases nearly by 0-61 ms.

speed of sound is not affected by the change in
pressure.

The speed V of a transverse wave in a
stretched string depends on the tension T and
mass per unit length m of string. It is given as :

-(7.4)

When a wave travelling in one medium passes
to another medium (i.e., in refraction), the speed,
wavelength and intensity* of the wave will change,
but the frequency of wave will not change. The
direction of travel of wave will also change except
for normal incidence (i.e., for Zi = 0°).

The sound waves differ from the electro-
magnetic waves (e.g., Y-rays, X-rays, ultraviolet light,
visible light, infrared rays, micro waves, and radio
waves). The electromagnetic waves are formed by
the periodic vibrations of the mutually perpendicular
electric and magnetic fields in a plane normal to the
direction of wave propagation. The electromagnetic
waves are thus the transverse waves, but unlike
sound waves they can travel through vacuum also.
The speed of electromagnetic waves is different in
different media and it is maximum (equal to
3 x 108 ms“) in vacuum (or air). The electromagnetic
waves transfer energy in form of photons.

Distinction between the light and sound waves

* The change in intensity is because of partial reflection at
the boundary surface separating the two media.


===== PAGE 3 =====

7.2 REFLECTION OF SOUND WAVES

Sound waves, just like any other wave, when
strike a hard surface (or boundary of another
medium), return back in the same medium
obeying the laws of reflection ie. (i) the angle
of reflection is equal to the angle of incidence,
(ii) the incident ray, reflected ray and normal at
the point of incidence, all lie in one plane. The
return of a sound wave on striking a surface such
as wall, metal sheet, plywood etc. back in the
same medium is called the reflection of sound
wave. The reflection of sound wave does not
require a smooth and shining surface like a
mirror. Sound waves get reflected from any
surface whether smooth or hard. The only
requirement for the reflection of sound wave is
that the size of the reflecting surface must be
bigger than the wavelength of the sound wave.
The phenomenon of reflection of sound waves is
utilized in making the megaphone (or speaking
tube), sound board and ear trumpet.

7.3 ECHO
Production (or generation) of an echo

If a person stands at some distance from a wall

(or a hillside) and produces a sharp sound, he hears
two distinct sounds : (i) the original (or direct)

- sound which is heard almost instantaneously and
(ii) the sound heard after reflection from the wall
(or hillside) which is called an echo. Thus,

Note : The reflected sound if heard along
with the original sound, is not the echo. Only

the sound heard after the original sound has
ceased (i.e., the sound distinctly separate from
the original sound), is called the echo.

Condition for hearing an echo

An echo is heard only if the distance of the
person producing sound from the rigid obstacle
(or reflector) is long enough to allow the reflected

sound to reach the person at least 0-1 second
after the original sound is heard. The reason is
that the sensation of sound persists in our ears
for about 0-1 second after the exciting stimulus
ceases to act. Hence to hear the echo distinctly
(separate from the original sound), it must reach
the ears at least 0-1 second after the original
sound.

If d is the distance of the observer from the
obstacle and V is the speed of sound in the
medium, then the total distance travelled by the
sound to reach the obstacle and then to come
back, is 2d. The time taken to hear the echo (or
reflected sound) is

total distance travelled 2d
speed of sound et

or a Cbs (7.5)
Le |

By putting t = 0-1 s and V = 340 m s* in air
at ordinary temperature, from eqn. (7.5), we get
340 x 0-1

2

Thus, to hear an echo distinctly, the reflecting
surface in air should be at a minimum distance
of 17 m from the listener. If the distance is less
than 17 m, the reflected sound will reach the ears
before the original sound dies out and so no echo
will be heard.

Note » (1) If the reflector is at a distance
less than 17 m, the original sound just mixes
up with the reflected sound.

(2) If there are repeated reflections at the

d= = 17m

reflecting surface, the sound gets prolonged.
This effect is known as reverberation which
can easily be experienced in tombs like Taj
Mahal, Sikandra, etc.

Thus to hear the echo distinctly, following
three conditions must be satisfied :

(1) The minimum distance between the source
of sound (or observer) and the reflector in
air must be 17 m. It is different in different
medium depending upon the speed of sound
in that medium. For example, inside sea


===== PAGE 4 =====

1400x0-1

2
= 70 m. i.e., to hear echo distinctly, the

obstacle in sea water should be at a minimum
distance of 70 m from the listener.

water, V = 1400 m s!, so d =

(2) The size of the reflector must be large enough
as compared to the wavelength of the sound
wave.

(3) The intensity of sound should be such that
the reflected sound reaching the ear is

sufficiently intense to be audible.

7.4 DETERMINATION OF SPEED OF
SOUND BY THE METHOD OF ECHO

The echo method can be used to determine
the speed of sound in air. For this, sound is
produced from a place at a known distance say,
d at least 50 m from the reflecting surface. The
time interval t in which the echo reaches the
place from where the sound was produced, is
noted by a stop watch having the least count
0-01. s. Then the speed of sound is calculated by
using the following relation :

-(7.6)

The experiment is repeated several times and
then the average value of speed of sound V is
determined.

7.5 USE OF ECHOES

Echoes find their application in sound ranging
and echo depth sounding by using the ultrasonic
waves.

The ultrasonic waves (frequency above
20 kHz) are used because of the following three
reasons :

(1) They can travel undeviated through a long
distance,

(2)
(3)

They can be confined to a narrow beam.

They are not easily absorbed in a
medium.

Note : Audible sound waves (frequency

20 Hz to 20 kHz) do not possess the above

properties. However, the ultrasonic waves in a
medium have the same speed as the speed of
audible sound waves in that medium.

(1) Use of echoes by bats, dolphins and
fisherman

Animals have different range of audible
frequency e.g. bats, dolphins and dogs have a
much higher upper audible limit than the human
beings. Bats can produce and detect the sound of
very high frequency up to about 100 kHz.

Bats fly with speed much lower than the
speed of sound. The sounds produced by the
flying bats get reflected back from an obstacle in
front of it. By hearing the echo, bats come to
know, even in the dark, the location of the
obstacle, so they can fly safely without colliding
with it. This process of detecting obstacle is
called sound ranging.

Dolphins detect their enemy and obstacle by
emitting the ultrasonic waves and hearing their
echo. They use ultrasonic waves for hunting their
prey.

A trawlerman or fisherman sends a pulse of
ultrasonic waves from a source (a very high
frequency vibrator) into the sea and receives the
waves reflected from the shoal of fish in a detector.
The total time ¢ of the to and fro journey of the

wave is recorded. The distance d of fish is then

calculated by using the relation d = uy where V

is nearly 1400 m s“! (the speed of ultrasonic waves
in sea water).

(2) Use of echoes by ‘SONAR’

The word ‘SONAR’ stands for sound
navigation and ranging. Fig. 7.1 shows the
principle of a sonar in which ultrasonic waves are
sent in all directions from the ship. These waves
are received after reflection from an obstacle such
as the enemy submarine, iceberg, sunken ship, etc.

= Ea


===== PAGE 5 =====

Fig. 7.1 Principle of sonar

To find the distance of obstacle from the ship
the time interval ¢ between the instant when
waves (pulse) are sent and the instant when
waves are received, after reflection from the
obstacle is measured. The distance d of the

obstacle from the source is then d = u

where V is the speed of ultrasonic waves in water.
The depth of sea can also be found by this
method. The process is then called echo depth
sounding.

Note : (41) In radar (radio detection and

ranging), also the echo method is used to detect
the presence of an obstacle and also to find its
range. A signal of electromagnetic waves (such as
radio waves or micro waves) is sent in space
which after reflection from the object (such as

enemy’s aeroplane) in its path, returns to the radar
itself.

(2) Both in ‘SONAR’ and ‘RADAR’, the
transmitter and the receiver are placed close to
each other. In Fig. 7.1, they are shown separated
just for clarity.

(3) Use of echoes in medical field

In medical field, echo method of ultrasonic
waves is used for imaging the human organs
(such as liver, gall bladder, uterus, womb, etc.)
This is called ultrasonography. Similarly, echo
cardiography is used to obtain the image of
human heart.

1. The diagram below shows (a) displacement-time,

and (b) displacement-distance, graph of a wave
travelling in a string with velocity 20 m s*. In
each case, use graph to calculate the frequency
and wavelength of the wave.

Fig. 7.2

Given : Wave velocity V = 20 m s!

(a) From graph in Fig. 7.2(a), the time for
one vibration of wave particle i.e. time period

T=0-10s
1 =
Frequency f= T = d10 10 Hz
From relation V = i
20
Wavel peta 2 ae
favelength 7 10 m

(b) From graph in Fig. 7.2(b), length of one wave
i.e., wavelength A = 2 m
From relation bi =fa,

eas 4

2. A sound produced on the surface of a lake takes
45 s to reach a boatman. How much time will it
take to reach a diver inside water at the same
distance if speed of sound in water is 4-5 times

the speed of sound in air ?

Given, Vivater > Voir = 4°5s bain = 45 Sy later =
d

From relation V,,. = 3 and V, ster = as

or (Vii X baie = Vivater *

‘water

Veg in
Rie Voss X ti = Zs x4S5s=ls.

3. A boy hears an echo of his own voice from a
distant hill after one second. The speed of sound
in air is 350 m s!. What is the distance of hill
from the boy ?

Given V=350ms1,t=1s.

Let d be the distance of hill from the boy.

Total distance travelled by the sound in going and
then coming back = 2d.

total distance travelled 2d
Now speed of sound V = teak
or d= Vt. 20%) 2175 m


===== PAGE 6 =====

4.

5,

6

A ‘RADAR’ is able to detect the reflected
waves from an enemy aeroplane after a time
interval of 0-02 milli-second. If the velocity of the
waves is 3 x 10° m s“', calculate the distance of
aeroplane from the radar.

Given : V=3 x 108 ms"! and
t = 0-02 milli-second = 0-02 x 10 s
Let d be the distance of aeroplane from the radar.

Total distance travelled by the waves in going and
then coming back = 2d

total distance travelled 2d
time taken t

Vt _ (3x10°)x@-02x1077)
te = ae

Velocity of waves V =

or d=
= 3x 10° m (or 3 km)

A boy standing in front of a wall at a distance of

85 m produces 2 claps per second. He notices that

the sound of his clapping coincides with the echo.

The echo is heard only once when clapping is

stopped. Calculate the speed of sound.

Let d be the distance of wall from the boy.

Given, d= 85m

To hear the echo, sound has to travel a total distance
=2d=2x85=170m

Since 2 claps are produced in one second, therefore

each clap is produced after ; s which is equal to

the time taken for the echo to be heard i.e.,

= 3 S= 0-5 s
Now the speed of sound

totaldistancetravelled 170m

= = 340 ms?
0-5s

time taken

A boy stands 60 m in front of a tall wall and
claps. The boy continues to clap every time an
echo is heard. Another boy finds that the time
taken between the first and fifty-first clap is 18 s.
Calculate the speed of sound.

Distance of boy from the wall d = 60 m

Total distance travelled by the sound = 2d = 120 m

Time interval between the 1° and 51* clap = 18 s

.. Time interval between two successive claps= 3 s
or Time taken for the echo to be heard t = & s

(a)

(b)

total distance travelled2d

H f V=
lence speed of sound oe Ses

120m
or V = T7505 = 333 mst
A man standing in front of a vertical cliff fires a
gun. He hears the echo after 3 s. On moving
closer to the cliff by 82-5 m, he fires again and
hears the echo after 2-5 s. Find : (a) the distance
of cliff from the initial position of man, and
(b) the speed of sound.
Fig. 7.3 shows the two positions of the man in front
of a cliff.

Let distance of cliff from the initial position of man
be d m and speed of sound be V m s"!.
wei)

For the first echo, t = a = 3s (given)

New

Initial
position position

Fig. 7.3

Cliff

On moving closer to the cliff by 82-5 m, the distance
of cliff from the new position becomes (d — 82:5) m,
then for second echo,

t= AES) = 25 s (given) ii)
Dividing eqn. (i) by eqn. (ii), we get
ath a, 2 AO
d-82:'5 2:5 5
or 6d — 495 = 5d
or d= 495m

From eqn. (i), V= af
Substituting the value of d = 495 m, and t=3s

2x99 = 330 ms

A person standing between the two vertical cliffs
and 640 m away from the nearest cliff, produces
sound. He hears the first echo after 4 s and the
second echo 3 s later. Calculate : (a) the speed of
sound in air, and (b) the distance between the
cliffs.

Fig. 7.4 shows the two cliffs and the position of the
person.

V=

a


===== PAGE 7 =====

(a)

(b)

10.

11.

<—— ¢ ——_>

id, = 640 m Fi
CLIFF feet Kaisints CLIFF
1 A 2
Fig. 7.4

First echo is heard from the nearest cliff.
Let d, be the distance of the nearest cliff 1 from
the person. Total distance travelled by the sound
in going and then coming back = 2d, = 2 x 640 m
= 1280m

Time taken t = 4s
total distance travelled 2d,

Speed of sound
time taken t

= 280m _ 320 ms"
The second echo is heard from the farther cliff 2. If
d, is the distance of the farther cliff 2 from the
person, then total distance travelled by the sound in
going and then coming back = 2d,

What are mechanical waves ?
Define the following terms in relation to a wave :
(a) amplitude, (b) frequency, (c) wavelength, and
(d) wave velocity.
A wave passes from one medium to another
medium. Mention one property of the wave
(i) which changes, (ii) which does not change.

Ans. (i) wavelength (or speed), (ii) frequency
State two factors on which the speed of a wave
travelling in a medium depends.
State two differences between the light and sound
waves.
What is meant by an echo ? State two conditions
necessary for an echo to be heard distinctly.
A man is standing at a distance of 12 m from a cliff.
Will he be able to hear a clear echo of his sound ?
Give a reason for your answer.
State two applications of echo.

Explain how the speed of sound can be determined
by the method of echo.

State the use of echo by a bat, dolphin and
fisherman.

How do bats avoid obstacles in their way, when in
flight ?

9.

14.

1S,

Time taken ¢t = 44+3 = 75
Now V= ae
Vt _ 320x7 _
d,= 37 =p = 120m
Hence distance between the two cliffs 1 and 2
=d,+d,

640 m + 1120 m = 1760 m

In a SONAR, ultrasonic waves are sent into the
sea water and the reflected waves from a sunken
ship are received after 2-0 s. If the velocity of
waves in sea water is 1450 m s~|, find the depth
of the sunken ship.

Given, V= 1450 ms!,t=2-05

Depth of the sunken ship d = y
= OK20 - 1450 m

What is meant by sound ranging ? Give one use of
sound ranging.

Name the waves used for sound ranging. State one
reason for their use. Why are the waves mentioned
by you not audible to us ?

What is ‘SONAR’ ? State the principle on which it
is based.

State the use of echo in medical field.

MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE

1,

The minimum distance between the source and the
reflector in air, to hear an echo, is approximately :

(a) 10m (b) 17m

(c) 34m (d) 50m. Ans. (b) 17 m.

To detect the obstacles in their path, bats produce :

(b) ultrasonic waves

(c) electromagnetic waves (d) radio waves.
Ans. (b) ultrasonic waves.

(a) infrasonic waves

NUMERICALS

1,

The wavelength of waves produced on the surface of
water is 20 cm. If the wave velocity is 24 m s~!,
calculate : (i) the number of waves produced in one
second, and (ii) the time in which one wave is
produced. Ans. (i) 120 (ii) 8-3 x 103 s


===== PAGE 8 =====

2. Calculate the minimum distance in air required
between the source of sound and the obstacle to hear
an echo. Take speed of sound in air = 350 m s“!.

Ans. 17-5 m

3. What should be the minimum distance between the
source and reflector in water so that the echo
is heard distinctly ? (The speed of sound in
water = 1400 m s7!). Ans. 70 m

4. Aman standing 25 m away from a wall produces a
sound and receives the reflected sound. (a) Calculate
the time after which he receives the reflected sound
if the speed of sound in air is 350 m s~!. (b) Will the
man be able to hear a distinct echo ? Explain the
answer. Ans. (a) 0-143 second (b) Yes
Reason : Original sound persists only for 0-1 s

5. A RADAR sends a signal to an aeroplane at a
distance 45 km away, with a speed of 3 x 10° ms ~.
After how much time is the signal received back
after reflecting from the aeroplane ?

Ans. 3 x 10+ s.

6. A man standing 48 m away from a wall fires a gun.
Calculate the time after which an echo is heard. (The
speed of sound in air is 320ms-!). Ans. 0-30 s

7. A ship on the surface of water sends a signal and
receives it back from a submarine inside water after
4 s. Calculate the distance of the submarine from the

ship. (The speed of sound in water is 1450 m s7!).
Ans, 2:9 km

8. A pendulum has a frequency of 5 vibrations per
second. An observer starts the pendulum and fires a
gun simultaneously. He hears echo from the cliff
after 8 vibrations of the pendulum. If the velocity of
sound in air is 340 m s“!, find the distance between
the cliff and the observer. Ans. 272 m

9. A person standing between the two vertical cliffs
produces a sound. Two successive echoes are heard
at 4 s and 6 s. Calculate the distance between the
cliffs.

(Speed of sound in air = 320 m s“!)

[Hint : First echo will be heard from the nearest

cliff and the second echo from the farther cliff.]
Ans. 1600 m

A man fires a gun and hears its echo after
5 s. The man then moves 310 m towards the hill and
fires his gun again. This time if he hears the echo
after 3 s, calculate the speed of sound.

Ans. 310 ms"

10.

On sending an ultrasonic wave from a ship towards
the bottom of a sea, the time interval between
sending the wave and receiving it back is found to
be 1-5 s. If the velocity of wave in sea water is
1400 m s~!, find the depth of sea.

11.

Ans. 1050 m

7.6 NATURAL VIBRATIONS

A body clamped at one point when disturbed
slightly from its rest position, starts vibrating. The
vibrations so produced are called the natural or
free vibrations of the body. The period (or
frequency) of vibration depends on the shape and
size (or structure) of the body. The time period
of the body is called its natural period and the
frequency is called its natural frequency. Each
body, capable of vibrating, vibrates with a
constant natural frequency and its amplitude of
vibration remains constant. The natural vibrations
of a body actually occur only in vacuum because
the presence of medium around the body offers
some resistance due to which the amplitude of

vibration does not remain constant, but it
continuously decreases. Thus,

Examples of natural (or free) vibrations

(1) If the bob of a simple pendulum is displaced
slightly from its mean (or rest) position, it starts
vibrating with its natural frequency which is
determined by the length / of the pendulum
and the acceleration due to gravity g at that
place and is given as

1
Frequency f = On e

(7.7)


===== PAGE 9 =====

ne ¥ %S

Different pendulums (having different lengths)
will vibrate with different frequencies (i.e., they
will have different natural frequencies). A
simple pendulum of length 1-0 m on earth
surface, where the acceleration due to gravity
is 9-8 m s~, has its natural frequency 0-5 Hz.

(2) A load suspended from a spring, when

stretched (or compressed) and then released,
starts vibrating with its natural frequency. Its
frequency is determined by the hardness (or
force constant K)* of the spring and the mass

K
m of the load (f= a= ). The frequency will

be different for the same load on different
springs and it will be different for different
loads on the same spring.

(3) When a tuning fork is struck against a hard

rubber pad, it vibrates with its natural
frequency. The vibrations form longitudinal
waves in air, which when reach our ears, sound
is heard. This sound is of a single frequency
(i.e., it is a pure note).

(4) When we strike the keys of a piano, various

strings are set in vibration each at its natural
frequency.

(5) When an air column in a flute (or organ pipe)

is made to vibrate, it vibrates with its natural
frequency which is inversely proportional to the
length of air column. In a flute, the notes of
different frequencies are produced by changing
the effective length of air column when
different holes in it are closed. In an organ pipe
open at both ends, different modes of vibrations
are of frequencies in the ratio 1 : 2 : 3 : ..., while
in an organ pipe with one end closed,
the frequencies of different modes are in ratio
i ceo hers Hoge

(6) When the string in the instruments like sitar,

guitar, violin, etc. is once plucked, the
transverse vibrations of a definite natural

* The force constant K of a spring is the force needed to

produce unit extension in it.

frequency are produced in the string. The
frequency f of vibration in a strictched
string depends on (i) the length / (f « WD,
(ii) the radius r (f e 1/r), and (iii) the tension
T (f < JT) in the string. Thus the frequency
of note produced by a string stretched between

its ends is given as f = + Vea where d is

the density of material of the string and
mr’d = m is the mass of unit length of the
string. The frequency f of the note can be
increased (a) by decreasing the length / of the
string, (b) by decreasing the radius r (or
thickness) of the string, and (c) by increasing
the tension T in the string.

(7) A string of a given length stretched between

its ends under a given tension can be made to
vibrate in different modes by plucking the
string at different points. If the string is plucked
in the middle, the string vibrates in one loop
as shown in Fig. 7.5(a). This vibration is called
the principal note of frequency /. If the string
is plucked at one-fourth length of string from
one end, it vibrates in two loops [Fig. 7.5(b)].
This vibration is called the first subsidiary
vibration of frequency 2f. Similarly if the string
is plucked at one-sixth length of string from
one end, it vibrates in three loops as shown in
Fig. 7.5(c). This vibration is called the second
subsidiary of frequency 3f. Thus the different
modes of vibration in a stretched string are of
frequencies in ratio 1 : 2 : 3. If / is the length
of string stretched between its ends, the
wavelength of different modes in Fig. 7.5 (a),
(b) and (c) will be 27, 2/2 and 2//3 respectively
ie., they are in ratio 3:2: 1.

a0”

(c)
Frequency = 2f — Frequency = 3f
First subsidiary Second subsidiary

Frequency = f
Principal note

Fig. 7.5 Different modes of vibrations in a string


===== PAGE 10 =====

Nature of natural vibrations

The natural vibrations are the simple harmonic
vibrations under the restoring force, the amplitude
and frequency of which remain constant. Once a
body starts vibrating, it continues its vibrations
with the same amplitude and same frequency
forever. Fig. 7.6 shows the displacement-time
graph for the natural (or free) vibrations of a
body in an ideal condition.

DISPLACEMENT

Fig. 7.6 Displacement-time graph for
natural or free vibration (in vacuum)

The vibrations of a constant amplitude can
occur only in vacuum. Since in practice, it is
impossible to have vacuum, it is very difficult
to realise such vibrations in practice. In
practice, the surrounding medium offers resistance
(or friction) to the motion, so the energy of
vibrating body continuously decreases due to
which the amplitude of motion gradually
decreases.

7.7 DAMPED VIBRATIONS

It is our common experience that when a
body is made to vibrate in a medium, the
amplitude of the vibrating body continuously
decreases with time and ultimately the body stops
vibrating. Such vibrations are called the damped
vibrations. Thus

In damped vibrations, two forces act on the
body : (i) the restoring force, and (ii) frictional
(or resistive) force due to the surrounding
medium. The amplitude of motion decreases due
to the frictional force. The frictional force at any

instant is proportional to the velocity* of the body
and it has the tendency to resist the motion. As
a result, the energy of the vibrating body
continuously dissipates in doing work against the
force of friction and so its amplitude gradually
decreases. After some time, when it has lost all
its energy, it stops vibrating. The energy lost by
the vibrating body changes contineously into the
heat energy and it gets dissipated in the
surrounding medium. The rate at which the
energy is lost to the surroundings (or the rate of
decrease of amplitude) depends on the nature (i.e.,
viscosity, density, etc.) of the surrounding medium
and also on the shape and size of the vibrating
body. Fig. 7.7 shows the displacement-time graph
for the body executing the damped motion.

DISPLACEMENT ——>

Fig. 7.7 Displacement-time graph
for the damped vibrations

Examples of damped vibrations

(1) When a slim branch of a tree is pulled and
then released, it makes the damped vibrations.

A tuning fork when stroked on a rubber pad,
executes the damped vibrations in air.

(2)
(3) A simple pendulum oscillating in air (or any
other medium) executes the damped
vibrations.

The vibrations of a loaded spring in air are
the damped vibrations.

(4)

* From relation F = ma, if a body moving with velocity v is
brought to rest by a resistive force F in time f, then resistive
force F = a . Thus the resistive force F needed to stop a
moving body is proportional to the velocity v of body.

ay local


===== PAGE 11 =====

Natural vibrations
. The amplitude of the
natural vibrations remains
constant and the vibrations |
continue forever.

Damped vibrations

| 1. The amplitude of the
damped vibrations
gradually decreases
with time and ultimately |
the vibrations cease.

—

In each vibration, there

is some loss of energy

in the form of heat. |
In addition of the |
restoring force, a
frictional or damping
force acts to oppose the |
motion.

The frequency of
vibrations is less than

the natural frequency.

2. There is no loss of energy | 2.
in natural vibrations.

. No external force acts 13.
on the vibrating body.
The vibrations are only
under the restoring force.

w

4. The frequency of 4.
vibrations depends on the
size and shape of the body
and it remains constant,

The amplitude of natural vibrations of a body
vibrating in a medium cannot remain constant due
to the presence of damping forces of the
surrounding medium. However, it is possible to
keep the amplitude of vibrations constant by
applying an external periodic force such that the
external periodic force compensates for the loss
of energy in each vibration due to the damping
forces. The vibrations of the body then are called
the forced vibrations. Thus

The vibrations of a body which take place under |
the influence of an external periodic force |
acting on it, are called the forced vibrations.

The body executing the forced vibrations is
thus acted upon by three forces : (i) the restoring
force, (ii) the frictional (or resistive) force, and
(iii) the external periodic force. When the external
periodic force is applied on the vibrating body,
the body no longer vibrates with its own natural
frequency, but it gradually acquires the frequency
of the applied periodic force. The external applied
force is also called the driving force.

The amplitude of the forced vibrations
depends on the frequency of the external force.
If the frequency of the external force is different

from the natural frequency of the body, the
amplitude of oscillations is very small. But if the
frequency of the external force is exactly equal
to the natural frequency of the vibrating body. the
amplitude of oscillations is very large. However
the amplitude of forced vibration does not change
with time.

»f forced vibrations

(1) When the stem of a vibrating tuning fork is
pressed against the top of a table, the tuning
fork forces the table top to vibrate with its
own frequency. The vibrations produced in
the table top are the forced vibrations. The
table top has a much larger vibrating area
than the tuning fork, so the forced vibrations
of the table top send forth a greater energy
and produces a louder (or more intense)
sound than that produced by the tuning fork.
(2) The vibrations produced in the diaphragm of
a microphone sound box with frequencies
corresponding to the speech of the speaker.
are the forced vibrations.

(3) In a guitar, an artist applies the periodic
force on the strings of the guitar to execute
the forced vibrations in them.

(4) In stringed instruments provided with a
hollow sound box containing air, strings
are made to vibrate by plucking which
produces forced vibrations in air of the
sound box. The surface area of air in the
sound box is large, so the forced vibrations
of air send forth a greater energy and cause
a loud sound.

en the natural (or free) and
forced vibrations

Forced vibrations |

The vibrations of a body |
in a medium in presence
of an external periodic
force are called the forced |
| vibrations.
2. The frequency of virbation | 2. The frequency of vibration
depends on the shape and is equal to the frequency
size of the body. of the applied force. |

"Natural (Free) vibrations |
1. The vibrations of a body ir 1.
in absence of any resistive |
or external force are called |

the natural vibrations.



===== PAGE 12 =====

3. The frequency of vibration | 3. The frequency of

vibration changes with
change in the frequency
of the applied force.

The amplitude of

vibration depends on the

frequency of the applied

force and it does not

change with time.

7.9 RESONANCE (a special case of forced
vibrations)

When a body vibrates in a medium under the
influence of an external periodic force of
frequency exactly equal to the natural frequency
of vibration of the body, it is said to execute the
resonant vibrations. These vibrations are of large
amplitude. The amplitude of resonance depends
on the frictional forces. Thus,

4. The amplitude of virbation | 4.
remains constant with time.

Resonance is a special case of forced vibrations.
When the frequency of the externally applied
periodic force on a body is equal to its
natural frequency, the body readily begins to

vibrate with an increased amplitude. This
phenomenon is known as resonance. The
vibrations of large amplitude are called the
resonant vibrations.

Suppose a body is set to vibrate freely and it
vibrates with a frequency f. It is the natural
frequency of vibration of the body. Now let a
periodic force of frequency n be applied on the
vibrating body. If n = f, the resonance takes place
and the body starts getting energy from the source
of the applied periodic force so its amplitude of
vibration is increased. In case n is greater or less
than f, (i.e., not equal to f), there will be no
resonance and the body will execute only the
forced vibrations of small amplitude.

Condition for resonance

Resonance occurs only when the frequency of
the applied force is exactly equal to the natural
frequency of the vibrating body and the applied
force causes forced vibration in the body.
At resonance, a loud sound is heard because the
body vibrating with a very large amplitude sends
forth a large amount of energy in the medium.

Demonstration of resonance

The phenomenon of resonance can be
demonstrated by the following experiments.

Experiment (1)-Resonance with tuning
forks : Mount two identical tuning forks A and
B of the same frequency on two separate sound
boxes such that their open ends face each other
as shown in Fig. 7.8. If the prong of one of the
tuning forks say, A is struck on a rubber pad, it
starts vibrating. On putting the tuning
fork A on its sound box, we find that the other
tuning fork B also starts vibrating and a loud
sound is heard.

FREQUENCY n

Fig. 7.8 Resonance with tuning forks

Reason — The vibrating tuning fork A
produces the forced vibrations in the air column
of its sound box. These vibrations are of large
amplitude because of large surface area of air in
the sound box. They are communicated to the
sound box of the fork B. The air column of B
starts vibrating with the frequency of
fork A. Since the frequency of these vibrations is
same as the natural frequency of the fork B, the
fork B picks up these vibrations and starts
vibrating under resonance. Thus the two sound
boxes help in communicating the vibrations and
in increasing the amplitude of vibrations.

Experiment (2) - Forced and resonant
vibrations of pendulums : Take four pendulums
A, B, C and D. Suspend them from the same
elastic support, say from a piece of stretched
rubber string PQ as shown in Fig. 7.9. A and B
are the pendulums of the same length, so their
natural frequency of vibration is same. D is a
pendulum which is longer than A or B, so its
natural frequency is lower than that of A or B.


===== PAGE 13 =====

The pendulum C is shorter than A or B, so its
natural frequency is higher than that of A or B.
The two unequal ones (i.e., C and D) are being
suspended on either side of the pendulum B.

The pendulum» RUBBER STRING

Q
A is set into
vibration by
displacing its bob
to one __ side,
normal to the c
length of the rn B
string PQ. D

Fig. 7.9 Forced and resonant
vibrations of pendulums

Observation :
The pendulum B
also starts vibrating initially with a small
amplitude and ultimately it acquires the same
amplitude as the pendulum A initially had. When
the amplitude of pendulum B is maximum, the
amplitude of pendulum A is minimum (because of
energy sharing). After sometime the amplitude of
pendulum B decreases and that of A increases.
The vibrations of pendulum B are in phase with
those of A (i.e., they reach their extreme positions
on either side simultaneously). The pendulums C
and D also vibrate, but each of them vibrate with
a very small amplitude.

Explanation — The vibrations produced in
pendulum A are communicated as forced
vibrations to the other pendulums B, C and D
through the rubber string PQ. The pendulums C
and D remain in the state of forced vibrations,
while the pendulum B comes in the state of
resonance. This is because the natural frequency
of pendulum B is equal to that of A (being of the
same length), and therefore there is an exchange
of energy only between the pendulums A and B,
so resonance takes place. When the amplitude of
pendulum B increases, the amplitude of pendulum
A decreases and vice-versa. The pendulum B,
therefore, vibrates with the frequency of
pendulum A and it remains in phase with the
pendulum A.

Experiment (3)-Resonance in air column :
Fig. 7.10 shows an arrangement for studying the

resonance in an air column. It consists of a long
cylindrical tube A and a cylindrical vessel B. The
tube A is fixed, while the vessel B can be moved
up or down and it can be clamped at a desired
position. Both the tube and the vessel are
connected at their lower ends by a rubber tube
and they are partially filled with water. The
movable vessel B serves as a reservoir. The
vibrating source (i.e., a tuning fork) is kept just
above the mouth of the tube A so that the
tube A serves as a closed end air pipe with water
surface in it forming the closed end (i.e., the
reflecting surface). Thus, an air column is formed
in the tube A between the water surface and its
mouth. When the air column is made to vibrate,
it will vibrate with its natural frequency
which depends on its length (since f « 1/I). By
moving the reservoir B up or down, the length
of air column in tube A can be changed due to
which the natural frequency of air column of tube
A changes.

RUBBER TUBE
Fig. 7.10 Resonance in air column

While performing the experiment, the tube A
is first filled with water up to the top. Then a
vibrating tuning fork is placed just above the
mouth of tube A and the level of water in it is
gradually lowered.

Observation : A loud sound is heard at a
certain level of water. On further lowering the
level of water in tube A, the loud sound ceases,
but when the length of air column in the tube
becomes three times the previous one, a loud
sound is heard again.


===== PAGE 14 =====

Explanation — The vibrating tuning fork held
just above the mouth of tube A, produces forced
vibrations in the air column of tube A. When the
frequency of air column is decreased by
increasing the length of the air column (i.e.,
lowering the water level in the tube), at a certain
level of water in tube A, a loud sound is heard.
This happens when the natural frequency of the
air column becomes equal to the frequency of the
tuning fork, i.e., the vibrations of the air column
are in resonance with those of the fork. On
further lowering the water level in tube A,
the frequency of air column does not remain
equal to the frequency of the fork, so the
loud sound ceases. But on further lowering the
level of water, a stage is again reached when a
loud sound is heard. At this stage, the frequency
of air column again becomes equal to the
frequency of tuning fork when the length of air
column becomes three times the previous length’,
so the resonance occurs again.

Difference between the forced and
resonant vibrations

7.10 SOME EXAMPLES OF RESONANCE

(1)

1. The vibrations of a body
under an external periodic
force of frequency different
from the natural frequency
of the body, are called the
forced vibrations.

2.The amplitude of vibration

is usually small,

3. The vibrations of the body
are not in phase with the
external periodic force.

4. These vibrations last for a
very small time after the
periodic force has ceased
to act.

*

1. The vibrations of a
body under an external
periodic force of
frequency exactly equal
to the natural frequency
of the body, are called
the resonant vibrations.

. The amplitude of
vibration is very large.

. The vibrations of the
body are in phase with
the external periodic
force.

. These vibrations last
for a long time after
the periodic force has
ceased to act.

Though in an air column of given length with one end

closed, the frequencies of different modes of vibrations are

in ratio i:3:5:

D sasrcaassag but if length of air column with

one end closed, is tripled, the frequency of vibration of air
column remains same because the wavelength remains same.

Resonant vibrations of pendulums : As
discussed earlier in experiment (2), if two
pendulums of same length are suspended
from a rubber string and one pendulum is
made to vibrate, the other pendulum also
starts vibrating with a large amplitude and
in same phase because of resonance.

Resonance in machine parts : When a
vehicle is driven, the piston of the engine
makes to and fro motion at a frequency
depending upon the speed of the vehicle. The
vibrations caused by the movement of piston
are transmitted to all parts of the vehicle. It
is just possible that at a certain speed of the
vehicle some parts of the vehicle (or its
frame) may have natural frequency of
vibration equal to the frequency of to and
fro movement of the piston. At this particular
speed of the vehicle, that particular part starts
vibrating vigorously due to resonance and a
rattling sound is heard. If this part is not
tightly fixed, such vibrations may cause the
part to drop out. To stop these vibrations, the
speed of vehicle is changed, so that the
condition of resonance does not hold.

In this manner resonance can occur
in all kinds of machines while operating in
a particular condition.

Note :

Resonance in a stretched string and
sound box of musical instruments and
sonometer : A vibrating string by itself
produces a very weak sound which cannot
be heard at a distance. Therefore all musical
stringed instruments such as guitar and
sonometer are provided with a sound box
(i.e. a hollow chamber). The box is so
constructed that the column of air inside it,
has a natural frequency which is same as that
of the string stretched on it, so that when
the string is made to vibrate, the air column
inside the box is set into forced vibrations,
the frequency of which is same as that of
the string. Since the sound box has a large
area, it sets a large volume of air into


===== PAGE 15 =====

(4)

(5)

vibrations, so due to resonance, a loud sound
is produced.

Resonance in air column and tuning fork :
As described in experiment (3), when the
frequency of air column becomes equal to
the frequency of the tuning fork vibrating
over its mouth, a loud sound is heard due to
resonance.

Resonance in a bridge : When a troop
crosses a suspension bridge, the soldiers are
asked to break their steps. The reason is that
when soldiers march in steps, each soldier
exerts a periodic force in same phase and
therefore the bridge executes the forced
vibrations of frequency equal to the frequency
of their steps. Now if the natural frequency
of the bridge happens to be equal to the
frequency of the steps, the bridge will vibrate
with a large amplitude due to resonance and
the suspension bridge may collapse.

(6)

Resonance in radio and TV receivers : The
tuning of a radio and TV receivers is based
on resonance. The radio and TV receivers
have electronic circuits which produce
electromagnetic vibrations, the frequency of
which can be changed by changing the values
of the electronic components (either the
capacity of condenser or the inductance of
coil)*. When we want to tune a radio (or TV)
receiver, we merely adjust the values of the
electronic components to produce vibrations
of frequency equal to that of the radio waves
which we want to receive. When both the
frequencies match, resonance occurs and only
the energy of signal of that particular
frequency is received from the waves present
in space, leaving the signals of other
frequencies which do not match with the
frequency of the receiver circuit. The signal
received is then amplified in the receiver set.

* Usually the capacity of condenser is changed.

1.

0)
(ii)

Fig. 7.11 shows three different modes of vibration
of a string of length /.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 7.1
Which of the vibration is of largest amplitude ?
Which of the vibration is of least frequency ?

(iii) What is the ratio of frequency between (a) and (c) ?
(iv) What is the ratio of wavelength between (b) and

(i)

(a)?
The vibration in Fig. (b) is of largest amplitude.

(ii)

(iv)

(a)
(b)

(c)

The vibration in Fig. (c) is of least frequency.

(iii) If the frequency of the principal note in Fig. (c) is f,
the frequency of note in Fig (a) is 3f.

Thus, f,=3f and fe =f

Ratio of frequency between (a) and (c) is

f,:f,=3:1

@ oo Ayh,=3:2

The stem of a vibrating tuning fork is pressed

against a table top.
Will it produce an audible sound ?

Does it cause the table top to set in vibrations ?
If yes, what type of vibrations are they ?
Under what condition does it lead to resonance ?
(a) Yes.
(b) Yes, the vibrations ‘caused in the table top are
the forced vibrations.

(c) It leads to resonance if the natural frequency
of vibrations of the table top becomes equal
to the frequency of the vibrating tuning fork.


===== PAGE 16 =====

3.

(a)
(b)

(a)

(b)

A vibrating tuning fork is placed over the mouth
of a burette filled with water. The tap is opened
and the water level gradually falls.

What do you observe ? Name the phenomenon.
When does it happen ?

If the water level in the burette falls further, will
you notice the same observation again ?

Observation : As the water level is allowed to fall
gradually, at a particular level of water (i.e., for a
certain length of air column), a loud sound is heard.

Name of the phenomenon : Resonance.

It happens when the natural frequency of air column
(which depends on its length) becomes exactly equal
to the frequency of the vibrating tuning fork. The
air in the column now vibrates with a large
amplitude conveying more energy to the ears so a
loud sound is heard.

Yes. If the water level in burette falls further, a loud
sound will again be heard when the length of air
column becomes three times. At this stage again the
natural frequency of air column will become equal
to the frequency of the vibrating tuning fork and
resonance will occur.

4.

Sometimes when a vehicle is driven at a
particular speed, a rattling sound is heard.
Explain briefly, why does this happen and give
the name of the phenomenon taking place.
Suggest one way by which the rattling sound
could be stopped.

At a particular speed of the vehicle, when the natural
frequency of vibration of some parts of the vehicle
becomes equal to the frequency of the to and fro
movement of the piston of its engine, resonance
occurs due to which those parts of the vehicle start
vibrating violently and a rattling sound is heard.

To stop the rattling sound, the speed of the vehicle
should be changed.

A string vibrates with a natural frequency of
256 Hz. Which of the tuning fork given below
will resonate with the string ?

(i) A of frequency 512 Hz, (ii) B of frequency
256 Hz, and (iii) C of frequency 128 Hz. Give
resaon.

B of frequency 256 Hz.

Reason : For resonance, frequency of driver

should be exactly equal to the natural frequency of
driven.

What do you understand by the natural vibrations of
a body ? Give one example.

What is meant by the natural frequency of vibrations
of a body ? Name two factors on which it depends.
(a) Draw a graph between displacement and time for

a body executing the natural vibrations.

(b) Where can a body execute the natural vibrations ?
State one condition for a body to execute the natural
vibrations.
Name one factor on which the frequency of sound
emitted due to vibrations in an air column depends.
Ans. length of air column
State one way of increasing the frequency of a note
produced by an air column.

Ans. by decreasing the length of the air column
State two ways of increasing the frequency of
vibrations of a stretched string.

Ans. (a) by increasing the tension in the string

(b) by decreasing the length of the string.

What adjustments would you make for tuning a
stringed instrument for it to emit a note of a desired

frequency ?

2,

10.

The diagram below in Fig. 7.12 shows three ways in
which the string of length / in an instrument can

vibrate.
+! i—> +— |
ag ae: eT
Fig. 7.12 @

(a) Which of the diagram shows the principal note?
(b) Which vibration has the frequency four times
that of the first ?
(c) Which vibration is of longest wavelength ?
(d) What is the ratio of frequency of the vibrations
in diagram (i) and (ii) ?
Ans. (a) i (b) iii (c) i (d) 1:2
Explain why strings of different thickness are
provided on a stringed instrument.
[Hint : Natural frequency of vibration of a stretched
string is inversely proportional to the radius (or
thickness) of string so notes of different frequencies
can be obtained by producing vibrations in the
different strings.]


===== PAGE 17 =====

11. A blade, fixed at one end, is made to vibrate by
pressing its other end and then releasing it. State one
way in which the frequency of vibrations of the blade
can be lowered.

Ans. by increasing the length of the blade or by sticking a
small weight on the blade at its free end so as to
increase its mass.

12. How does the medium affect the amplitude of the
natural vibrations of a body ?

13. What are the damped vibrations ? How do they differ
from the free vibrations ? Give one example of each.

14. The diagram in Fig. 7.13 shows the displacement-
time graph of a vibrating body.

4 DISPLACEMENT 4
2

Fig. 7.13
(i) Name the kind of vibrations.

(ii) Give one example of such vibrations.

(iii) Why is the amplitude of vibrations gradually
decreasing ?

(iv) What happens to the vibrations of the body after
some time ?

15. A tuning fork is vibrating in air. State whether the
vibrations are natural or damped ?
Ans. damped

16. Draw a sketch showing the displacement against time

for a body executing the damped vibrations.
17. What are the forced vibrations ? Give one example

to illustrate your answer.
18.
19. What is meant by resonance ? Describe a simple

experiment to illustrate the phenomenon of resonance
and explain it.

Distinguish between the natural and forced vibrations.

20.
21.

State the condition for the occurrence of resonance.
Complete the following sentence :

Resonance is a special case of ........ vibrations, when
frequency of the driving force is natural
frequency of the body.

Ans. forced, equal to the

22. Differentiate between the forced and resonant
vibrations.

27.

Why is a loud sound heard at resonance ?

Ans. At resonance, the body vibrates with a large
amplitude thus conveying more energy to the ears,
so a loud sound is heard.

Fig. 7.14 shows two tuning forks A and B of the
same frequency mounted on two separate sound
boxes with their open ends facing each other. The
fork A is set into vibration. (a) Describe your
observation. (b) State the principle illustrated by this
experiment.

Fig. 7.14

In Fig. 7.15, A, B, C and
D are the four pendulums
suspended from the same
elastic string XY. The
lengths of pendulum A
and D are equal, while the
length of pendulum B is
shorter and of the
pendulum C is longer.
The pendulum A is set into vibrations.
(a) What is your observation about the virbations of
pendulum D ? (b) Give reason for your observation
in part (a). (c) What type of vibrations take place in
pendulums B and C ? (d) Give reason for the answer
in part (c).

A vibrating tuning fork, held over an air column of a
given length with its one end closed, produces a loud
audible sound. Name the phenomenon responsible
for it and explain the observation.

In Fig. 7.15, A, B, C and D represent the test tubes
each of height 20 cm which are filled with water up to
heights of 12 cm, 14cm, 16cm and 18 cm respectively.
If a vibrating tuning fork is placed over the mouth of
test tube D, a loud sound is heard.

c
Fig. 7.15



===== PAGE 18 =====

(a) Describe the observations with the tubes A, B and | 28. When a troop crosses a suspension bridge the soldiers

C when the vibrating tuning fork is placed over
the mouth of these tubes.

(b) Give the reason for your observation in each
tube.

(c) State the principle illustrated by the above
experiment.

are asked to break their steps. Why ?

29. Why are the stringed instruments like guitar provided
with a hollow sound box ?

30. How do you tune your radio set to a particular
station ? Name the phenomenon involved in doing

so and define it.

Ans. (a) No loud sound is heard with the tubes A and C, | MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE

but a loud sound is heard with the tube B.

(b) Frequency of air column in tube D is equal to
the frequency of tuning fork. Resonance occurs
with the air column in tube B whereas no
resonance occurs with the air column of tubes
A and C. The frequency of vibrations of air
column in tube B is same as the frequency of
vibrations of air column in tube D because
the length of air column in tube D is 20 — 18
= 2 cm and that in tube B is 20 - 14 = 6 cm
(i.e., three times). On the other hand, the
frequency of vibrations of air column in tubes
A and C is not equal to the frequency of
vibrations of air column in tube D.

(c) When the frequency of vibrations of air column
is equal to the frequency of the vibrating tuning
fork, resonance occurs.

1. A wire stretched between the two fixed supports, is
plucked exactly in the middle and then released. It
executes (neglect the resistance of the medium) :
(a) resonant vibrations (b) natural vibrations
(c) damped vibrations (d) forced vibrations.

Ans. (b) natural vibrations

2. When a body vibrates under a periodic force, the
vibrations of the body are :
(a) natural vibrations (b) damped vibrations
(c) forced vibrations (d) resonant vibrations.
Ans. (c) forced vibrations

3. A tuning fork of frequency 256 Hz will resonate with
another tuning fork of frequency :
(a) 128 Hz (b) 256 Hz

(c) 384 Hz (d) 512 Hz. — Ans. (b) 256 Hz

7.11 CHARACTERISTICS OF SOUND
Two sounds can be distinguished from
one another by the following three different
characteristics :
(1) loudness,
(2) pitch (or shrillness), and
(3) quality (or timbre).
The above characteristics of a given sound can
be obtained from the wave pattern of that sound.
Fig. 7.17 shows a set-up to obtain the wave

VIBRATING
TUNING
FORK

Fig. 7.17 Set-up to study the sound pattern

pattern of a sound wave, using a microphone and
a cathode ray oscilloscope (C.R.O.). The sound to
be studied is produced before the microphone
connected to the Y-input of C.R.O. The wave’
pattern of sound (i.e., displacment-time graph) is
obtained on the screen of C.R.O.

(1) Loudness and intensity

it in front of the microphone. You will hear a
feeble (or soft) sound. Sketch the trace you
observe on the screen of C.R.O. Now strike the
same tuning fork hard and bring it near the
microphone. A loud sound is heard. Again sketch


===== PAGE 19 =====

Ny . -
Been the trace observed on the screen of C.R.O. intensity ie., the energy conveyed by the sound

wo Fig. 7.18 shows two such sketches. wave near the eardrum of the listener, and (ii) the
= sensitivity of the ears of the listener. Thus
loudness of sound of a given intensity may differ
from listener to listener i.e., the sound of the
same intensity may appear to be of different
loudness to different persons. Further, two sounds
j of the same intensity, but of different frequencies
_ (a) SOFT NOTE may differ in loudness even to the same listener

DISPLACEMENT —

t i because the sensitivity of ears is different for
5 i LARGE different frequencies. For normal ears, the
8 AMPLITUDE | sensitivity is maximum at the frequency 1 kHz.
g : Thus for a sound wave loudness has a subjective
a | nature, while intensity, being a measurable
(b) LOUD NOTE quantity, has an objective nature.
FS FAA EE eae ees Factors affecting the loudness of sound
In Fig. 7.18, the two waves have same The loudness of sound heard at a place

frequency and same wave form (sine wave), but depends on the following five factors :

they differ in amplitude. Obviously, the loud (i) Loudness is proportional to the square of

sound corresponds to the wave of large amplitude. the amplitude : When a body vibrates with
Similarly if the key of a piano is hit hard or a greater amplitude, it sends forth a

a pipe is blown hard, we put more energy in the greater amount of energy and hence the

vibrating system due to which the amplitude of energy received by the eardrum is large,

vibrations is increased and a loud sound is so the sound appears louder.

produced. Thus,

(ii) Loudness varies inversely as the square of

distance from the source : If the listener
is close to the source of sound, he hears

it quite louder, but if he is far away, the

Intensity : The intensity of a sound wave at a sound becomes feeble. If he moves further
point of the medium is the amount of sound away from the source, a stage may reach
energy passing per second normally through unit when the sound becomes inaudible. Thus,
area at that point. Its unit is watt per metre” closer the source, louder is the sound.

(W m~”). The intensity of ordinary sound is nearly
10-6 W m~”, while minimum intensity of sound
audible to ears is 10! W m™~. Greater the energy
carried by a sound wave, greater is the intensity
of sound. The intensity of a sound wave in air is
proportional to (a) the square of the amplitude of : ;
vibrations, (b) the square of the frequency of For this reason, the bell in schools,
vibrations, and (c) the density of air. temples etc. is made big in size.
Subjective nature of loudness and objective TW eas a, taints Soke a8 Sen ith a, Oe
nature of intensity sound given by it is feeble, but when it
is placed on a table top, the sound
The loudness of a sound depends on (i) the becomes much louder. The reason is that

(iii) Loudness depends on the surface area of
the vibrating body : A large vibrating area
sends forth a greater amount of energy.
Hence larger the surface area of the
vibrating body, louder is the sound heard.


===== PAGE 20 =====

the table top provides comparatively a
large surface area of air to vibrate and so
the sound energy reaching our ears
increases. Similarly in case of the stringed
instruments, a sound chamber is provided
to increase the volume of air to vibrate
and hence the loudness of sound increases.
(iv) Loudness depends on the density of the
medium : More the density of medium,
more is the loudness.

(v) Loudness depends on the presence of
resonant bodies : The presence of resonant
bodies near the vibrating body increases

the loudness of sound.

Relationship between loudness and

intensity

Although loudness of sound depends on its
intensity, but loudness is not same as intensity.
Intensity is a measurable quantity, while loudness
is a sensation. Experimentally, Weber and Fechner
established a relationship between the loudness L
and intensity J which is given as :

where K is a constant of proportionality.
Obviously, loudness increases with the increase in
intensity, but not in the same proportion.

Units of loudness and sound level (phon and
decibel) : The unit of loudness is phon. The level
of sound is expressed in decibel (dB). The
loudness of a sound in phon is the loudness in
decibel of an equally loud pure sound of
frequency 1 kHz. Thus both the phon and the
decibel scales agree at the frequency 1 kHz.

From eqn. (7.8), the loudness L is related to
the intensity J as L = K log,, J. If at a given
frequency, J, and J, are the intensities of
two sounds of which loudness are L, and Ly
respectively, then

L, = K logy) I, and Ly = K log) Jp.

Hence difference in loudness of the two sounds is
L=L, — Ly = K (logy J, — 10849 Ly)

If J, is the minimum intensity (= 10"? W m)
of audible sound at frequency 1 kHz, then L is
called the sound level.

Taking K = 1, the sound level is written as

(7.9)

q
L=lo81 ry bel

I 1
= 4101 — |k\x— bel
or L= oeo(} 10

If we write 7h bel as decible (4B), then

(7.10)

Here bel or decibed (dB) is the unit of loudness
level, named after the scientist Alexander Graham
Bel, the inventor of telephone.

Obviously for J, = Jy, sound level L = 0 dB i.e.
sound of intensity 10-!2 W m~ at frequency
1 kHz has the loudness zero dB. If intensity at a
point increases from J, to J, = 100 Jo, the increase
in sound level will be 10 log,,100 = 20 dB. For an
increase in intensity from J, to J, = 100,00 J,
the increase in sound level will be 10 log,, 100,00
= 40 GB.

I
Now if L = 1 dB, then 10 log,, 4] =1
0

i)

or ~ =Antilog (5) = Antilog (0-1) = 1-26



===== PAGE 21 =====

Level of sound produced by different objects

Object producing sound Sound level (dB)

Jet at takeoff

Pop concert

Police car siren 120

Heavy hammering machine 110
| Diesel lorry 90

Motorcycle or car 80
| Vacuum cleaner 60
Normal conversation 50
| Soft whisper 30

Recording studio 20

Leaves rusting 10

Dropping pin (minimum 0

audible sound)

Noise pollution :

Disturbance produced in the environment due
to undesirable loud and harsh sound, of level
above 120 dB, from various sources such as
loudspeaker, siren, moving vehicles, etc. is called
noise pollution. A constant hearing of sound of
level above 120 dB can cause headache and
permanent damage to the ears of the listener.
The safe limit of level of sound for hearing
is from 0 to 80 dB. Sound of level 30 dB to
10 dB has a soothing sensation, while the sound
of level 0 dB represents the lower limit of
hearing.

Note : The limit of hearing should not be

confused with the limit of audibility. The limit

| of audibility refers to the frequency of sound

20 Hz to 20 kHz which a man can hear,

while the limit of hearing is the lowest level
| of loudness (= 0 dB) which a man can hear.

(2) Pitch (or shrillness) and frequency

Pitch is that characteristic of sound by which

an acute (or shrill) note can be distinguished
from a grave or flat note.

Pitch refers only to the musical sounds and
each musical note has a definite pitch. If the
pitch is high, the sound is shrill and if the pitch
is low, the sound is flat. In a tape recorder (or
TV), bass and treble refer to low and high pitch

respectively. At a bass (or woofer on), low pitch
(i.e., grave) sound produced by tabla or dholak
becomes predominant, while at treble, high pitch
(i.e., shrill) sound produced by flute or
ghoonghroo (ankle bells) becomes predominant.

Pitch of a note depends on its frequency. Two
notes sounded on the same instrument
with same amplitude, will differ in pitch when
their vibrations are of different frequencies. er

Fig. 7.19 shows the traces of two waves
obtained on the screen of C.R.O. when two
tuning forks A and B of frequencies 256 Hz and
512 Hz respectively are separately made to
vibrate one after the other (by striking them with
the same force on a rubber pad) in front of the
microphone of the experimental set-up shown in
Fig. 7.17. Both the traces have the same
amplitude and the same wave form (i.e., sine
wave), but they differ in frequency. On hearing
the sounds of the two'tuning forks, it is observed
that the sound of tuning fork B of frequency
512 Hz is shriller than the sound of tuning
fork A of frequency 256 Hz. Thus more the
frequency of wave, higher is its pitch and less the
frequency of wave, lower is its pitch.

DISPLACEMENT —>

Fork A (Grave sound)
(a) LOW PITCH NOTE (Frequency = f )

DISPLACEMENT —>

i Fork B (Shrill sound)
(b) HIGH PITCH NOTE (Frequency = 2f)
Fig. 7.19 Waves of different pitch


===== PAGE 22 =====

Examples of change in pitch : (a) Instruments
such as piano, violin and guitar have several
strings of different thickness under different
tensions. Since the frequency of vibrations of a
string depends on the tension, and thickness of a
string, they can produce notes of different pitch. A
note of higher pitch can be obtained by vibrating
the string under high tension or by vibrating a
thinner string.

(b) In case of a flute, a lower note is obtained
by closing some more holes so that the length of
the vibrating air column increases.

(c) As the water level in a pitcher kept under
a water tap rises, the length of air column
decreases, so the frequency of sound produced
increases i.e., the sound becomes shriller and
shriller. Thus by hearing the sound from a
distance, one can get the idea of water level in
the pitcher.

(d) The voice of a women is usually of higher
pitch than that of a man.

Subjective nature of pitch and objective
nature of frequency

Pitch is not the same as frequency. The pitch
refers to the sensation as perceived by the
listener. It may be different for a sound of a
particular frequency to the different listeners (i.e.,
pitch is subjective). On the other hand, frequency
is a measurable quantity. It depends on the source
producing the sound. It has a definite value for
a given sound which is equal to the frequency of
its source. It has nothing to do with the listener,
so frequency is an objective quantity.

(3) Quality (or timbre) and wave form

Fig. 7.20 shows the wave patterns of two
sounds of same loudness (i.e., same amplitude)
and same pitch (i.e., same frequency), but emitted

by two different sources. They produce different
sensations in our ears because they differ in wave
form, one is a sine wave while other is a
triangular wave.

Displacement—> Displacement

Fig. 7.20 Two sounds of same amplitude (i.e., same
loudness) and same frequency but of different wave forms

Usually the sound from an instrument does
not contain a note of single frequency, but it
contains a combination of vibrations of different
frequencies and ‘different amplitudes. The
vibration of lowest frequency and maximum
amplitude is called the principal (or fundamental)
vibration and the vibrations of frequency integer
multiples of it, are called the subsidiary (or
secondary) vibrations. The subsidiary vibrations
are of small amplitudes. The resultant vibration
obtained by the superposition of all these
vibrations, gives the wave form of the sound
which we hear.

Now suppose with the set-up of Fig. 7.17,
first a tuning fork of frequency 256 Hz is struck
and placed in front of the microphone and
next a note of frequency 256 Hz is produced
by a piano in front of the microphone. The traces
obtained on the screen of C.R.O. for the
two cases are shown in Fig. 7.21. The
sketch (a) shows a pure note (sine curve) of
single frequency produced by the tuning fork,
while the sketch (b) is of same amplitude and
same frequency (or same pitch), but it has a
different wave form due to the presence of a
mixture of subsidiary vibrations alongwith the
principal vibration. The subsidiary vibrations


===== PAGE 23 =====

present in the musical note make the wave form
complex. It is not a sine curve.

(a) WAVE FORM OF TUNING FORK

DISPLACEMENT —> DISPLACEMENT —>

(b) WAVE FORM OF A PIANO
Fig. 7.21 Pure note and musical note

Different instruments produce different
subsidiary notes. A note played on a piano has a
large number of subsidiary notes, while the
same note when played on a flute contains only
a few subsidary notes. Thus, we can easily
distinguish between the sounds of a piano and a
flute by their different wave forms, though they
may be of exactly the same loudness and same
pitch.

Recognision of the sources of two sounds by
their quality : Each vibrating body has its
characteristic wave form. This makes it possible
for one to recognise the vibrating body even
without seeing it. You generally recognise a
person by hearing his voice on telephone without
seeing him. It is because the vibrations produced
by the vocal chord of each person have a
characteristic wave form which is different for
different persons. Similarly, one can distinguish
and recognise the sounds of two different
musical instruments because of their different
wave forms even if they are of same pitch and
same loudness.

To summarize, the table below gives the factor
affecting the different characteristics of sound.

7.12 MUSIC AND NOISE

All sounds, which produce the sensation of
hearing, can be roughly divided into two
categories : (1) music, and (2) noise.

(1) Music : It is a pleasant, continuous and
uniform sound produced by the regular and
periodic vibrations. For example, the sounds
produced by a violin, piano, flute, tuning
fork, etc. are the musical sounds. Their sound
level is usually between 10 dB to 30 dB.

Noise : The sounds other than the musical sound
are called noise. Jt is a sound produced by an
irregular succession of disturbances and is
usually a discontinuous sound. It is discordant
and unpleasant to the ears. For example, the
sound produced when a stone is thrown on a tin
shade is a noise. Usually all the sounds of level
above 120 dB are termed as noise.

Fig. 7.22 shows the wave forms of a music and

(2)

a noise.
uk
5 Time >
8
a
2
a (a) Music
t
2 Time >
:
a (b) Noise

Fig. 7.22 Wave forms of a music and a noise.

Note : The distinction between a music and
noise is not very sharp, it is rather subjective.
A sound which is music to someone, may be a
noise to others. For example, pop song is music
for the young generation, while it may be a noise
for the old generation.



===== PAGE 24 =====

COMPARISON BETWEEN THE MUSIC AND NOISE

Js-slfie gules arcouh arid pleasauie 40 mlieats;
2. tis progued by the vibrations which are petidi.

einen

1. In Fig. 7.23, A and B represent the displacement-
distance graphs for two sound waves when they
pass through air. (a) What is the relation between
their (i) velocities, (ii) wavelengths, (iii) pitch,
and (iv) loudness ? (b) How do they differ in
quality ?

(a)(i) Velocity of both the waves A and B is same,
since it depends on the medium through which
they pass which is the same (i.e., air) in both
the cases i.e, Vi = Vp.

(ii) From Fig. 7.23, it is obvious that there are
three vibrations of wave A while two
vibrations of wave B in the same distance
(= 2x). Therefore, 3A, = 2A,

Fd Need
wl>
w

= ok, dea

or

3
3

ao

DISPLACEMENT
)

mm
14

|
DISTANCE —

DISPLACEMENT
°

Fio 722

1. It is harsh, discordant and unpleasant to the ear.

2. It is produced by an irregular succession of
disturbances.

3. The component waves change their character
suddenly and they are of short duration.

4. The sound level is high (above 120 dB).

5. The wave form is irregular.

Example : The sound produced by an aeroplane, road roller,
industrial machines, etc.

..., Frequencyof A(f,) = V/A,
(iii) Frequency of B ( 1) ~ V/ig
Since V is same for both.
Sx _ Ap dp _ 3
ri = 1x, But he =a
iach wi)
Hence — = =15
fp 2

i.e., pitch of A is 1-5 times that of B.

(iv) The wave B has a larger amplitude (= 14 mm)
than A (= 8 mm), therefore the wave B will
produce a louder = than A.

Loudnessof B (14 Poibir4gg 381
Loudnessof A ~ (8) = 16> ReaMy’:

(b) The two wave forms are same so they have the
same quality.
2. A certain sound has a frequency of 256 hertz and
a wavelength of 1-3 m.
(a) Calculate the speed of sound.
(b) What difference would be felt by a listener
between the above sound and another sound

travelling at the same speed, but of wavelength
2-6 m ?

(a) For first sound, f = 256Hz, A= 13m
«. Speed V=fA = 256 x 1:3 = 3328 mst.
(b) For second sound, V = 3328 ms, 4 = 2.6m
.. Frequency f = a = es = 128 Hz


===== PAGE 25 =====

The frequency (i.e., pitch) of the first sound is
256 Hz which is twice that of the second sound (which
is 128 Hz). Hence to the listener, the first sound will be
shriller than the second sound.

3. The ratio of amplitudes of two waves is 3 : 4.
Find the ratio of their (i) loudness, and (ii) pitch.

Given : a, : a, =3:4

1.
2.

Name three characteristics of a musical sound.

(a) Which of the following quantity determines the
loudness of a sound wave ?
(i) wavelength, (ii) frequency, and
(iii) amplitude.
(b) How is loudness related to the quantity
mentioned above in part (a) ?
Ans. (a) (iii) amplitude (b) loudness o< (amplitude)?

3. If the amplitude of a wave is doubled, what will be
the effect on its loudness ?

Ans. loudness will become four times

Two waves of the same pitch have amplitudes in the
ratio 1 : 3. What will be the ratio of their (i) loudness,
and (ii) frequencies ? Ans. (i) 1:9 (ii) 1:1.

How does the wave pattern of a loud note differ from
a soft note ? Draw a diagram.

Name the unit in which loudness of sound is
measured. Ans. phon

Why is the loudness of the sound heard by a plucked
wire increased when it is mounted on a sound board ?

Define the term intensity of a sound wave. State the
unit in which it is measured.

How is loudness of sound related to the intensity of
wave producing it ?

10. Comment on the statement ‘loudness of sound is of
subjective nature, while intensity is of objective

nature.’

State three factors on which loundess of sound heard

by a listener depends.

Name the unit used to measure the sound level.
Ans. decibel

What is the safe limit of sound level in dB for

our ears ? Ans. below 80 dB

What is meant by noise pollution ? Name one source

of sound causing the noise pollution.

il.
12.
13.
14.

15. What determines the pitch of a sound ?

18.

19.

21.

(i) Since loudness «< (amplitude)? or Lo a?
al

2. (4 3

L, a) -(2

4
(ii) The pitch of a sound does not depend on its
amplitude, so the ratio of pitch f, : f, = 1:1.

2
} =9:16

Name the subjective property of sound related to its

frequency. Ans. pitch

. Name and define the characteristic which enables one

to distinguish two sounds of same loudness, but of
different frequencies, given by the same instrument.
Draw a diagram to show the wave pattern of high
pitch note and a low pitch note, but of the same
loudness.
How is it possible to detect the filling of a bottle
under a water tap by hearing the sound at a distance ?
The frequencies of notes given by flute, guitar and
trumpet are respectively 400 Hz, 200 Hz and
500 Hz. Which one of these has the highest pitch ?
Ans. Trumpet
Complete the following sentences :

(a) The pitch of sound increases if its frequency

(b) If the amplitude of a sound is halved, its
loudness becomes
Ans. (a) increases (b) one-fourth

. The diagram below shows three different modes of

vibration P, Q and R of the same string.

Fig. 7.24

(a) Which vibration will produce a louder sound
and why ?

(b) Which vibration will produce sound of
maximum shrillness (or pitch) and why ?

(c) What is the ratio of wavelength of vibrations P

and R ?
Ans. (a) R, because its amplitude is maximum
(b) P, because its frequency is maximum

(C) Ap: Apel :3
as


===== PAGE 26 =====

26.

27.

29,

31.

Name the characteristic which enables one to
distinguish the sound of two musical instruments even
if they are of the same pitch and same loudness.
Ans. quality
How does the two sounds of same loudness and same
pitch produced by different instruments differ ? Draw
diagrams to illustrate your answer.
Two identical guitars are played by two persons to
give notes of the same loudness and pitch. Will they
differ in quality ? Give a reason for your answer.
Two musical notes of the same pitch and same
loudness are played on two different instruments. Their
wave patterns are shown in Fig. 7.25.

t t
y y
t— t—>
VIOLIN PIANO
Fig. 7.25

Explain why are the wave patterns different.

Which characterstic of sound makes it possible to
recognise a person by his voice without seeing him?

. State the factor that determines

(i) the pitch of a note,

(ii) the loudness of the sound heard, and
(iii) the quality of the note.

Ans. (i) frequency (ii) amplitude (iii) wave form.
Name the characterstic of the sound affected due
to a change in its (i) amplitude, (ii) wave form,
and (iii) frequency.

Ans. (i) loudness (ii) quality (iii) pitch.
In what respect does the wave pattern of a noise
and music differ ? Draw diagram to explain your
answer.

The sketches I to IV in Fig. 7.26 show sound waves,
all formed in the same time interval.

hi Fig. 7.26
Which diagram shows
(i) a note from a musical instrument,
(ii) a soft (or feeble) note,

(iii) a bass (or low frequency) note.
Ans. (i) IV (ii) I Gii)

32.

»
Fig. 7.27 shows the wave patterns of three sounds”
A, B and C. Name the characteristic of sound -
which is same between (i) A and B, (ii) B and C, and

(iii) C and A.

33.

Fig. 7.27
Ans. (i) loudness and quality (ii) none (iii) pitch

A microphone is connected to the Y-input of a
C.R.O. Three different sounds are made in turn in
front of the microphone. Their traces (a), (b) and (c)
produced on the screen are shown in Fig. 7.28.

(a) (b) (c)

34.

Fig. 7.28
(i) Which trace is due to the loudest sound ? Give
reason for your answer.
(ii) Which trace is due to the sound with the lowest
pitch ? Explain your answer.
Ans. (i) b, since amplitude is largest
(ii) a, since frequency is lowest.
State one difference between a musical note and a
noise.

MULTIPLE CHOICE TYPE

1.

3.

By reducing the amplitude of a sound wave, its :
(a) pitch increases (b) loudness decreases
(c) loudness increases (d) pitch decreases.
Ans. (b) loudness decreases
Two sounds of same loudness and same pitch
produced by the two different instruments differ in
their :
(a) amplitudes (b) frequencies
(c) wave forms (d) all the above.
Ans. (c) wave forms
Two sounds A and B are of same amplitudes, same
wave forms but of frequencies f and 2f respectively.
Then :
(a) B differ in quality from A
(b) B is grave, A is shrill
(c) B is shrill, A is grave
(d) B is louder than A.
Ans. (c) B is shrill, A is grave.
